THEMES IN

INDIAN HISTORY
PART I

Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24
Textbook in. History
for Class XII

THEMES IN

INDIAN HISTORY
PART II

cams act
NCSEERT

wsta weer sya sie user aeagq
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING

Rationalised 2023-24
12094 — THEMEs IN INDIAN HisTory (Part II)

Textbook for Class XII

la
First Edition
May 2007 Vaisakha 1929
Reprinted
December 2007, January 2009,
January 2010, November 2010,
March 2013, November 2013,
December 2014, February 2016,
February 2017, December 2017,
December 2018, January 2019,
November 2019, January 2021,
July 2021 and December 2021

Revised Edition
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944

PD 120T HK

© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007, 2022

% 115.00

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermarlc

Published at the Publication Division by
the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, Sri
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at Nav Durga Offset Printers,
54/3-A, 54/2, Janta Nagar, Industrial
Area, Garh Road, Meerut-250 002 (U.P.)

ISBN 81-7450-651-9 (Part I)
81-7450-735-3 (Part II)

‘\
p

>
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Q_ No partof this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted,

in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise
without the prior permission of the publisher.

oO

This book is sold subjectto the condition thatit shall not, by way of trade, be lent, re-sold,
hired out or otherwise disposed of withoutthe publisher's consent, in any form of binding
or cover other than that in which itis published.

oO

The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price
indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should
be unacceptable.

A

OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari |Il Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781021 Phone : 0361-2674869
f~ »
Publication Team
Head, Publication Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor (In charge): Bijnan Sutar
Production Officer A.M. Vinod Kumar
Cover and Layout
Arrt Creations, New Dethi
Cartography
K. Varghese
g y,
J

Rationalised 2023-24

FOREWORD

The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures
will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system
of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).

The success of this effort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on
their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.
We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children
generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on
to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis
of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as
receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.

These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode
of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as
rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required
number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods
used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience,
rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have
tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration
for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space
to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small
groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.

The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the
advisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan, and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Professor Neeladri Bhattacharya, Centre for
Historical Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi for guiding
the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the
development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for
making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and
organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their

Rationalised 2023-24
vi

resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the
members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the
Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal
Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and
contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and
continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT
welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to
undertake further revision and refinement.

Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

Rationalised 2023-24
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce
content load on students. The National Education Policy 2020,
also emphasises reducing the content load and providing
opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In
this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to
rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken
into consideration in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the
following:

* Overlapping with similar content included in other subject
areas in the same class

* Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the
same subject

« Difficulty level

* Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
interventions from teachers and can be learned by children
through self-learning or peer-learning

* Content, which is irrelevant in the present context

This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying
out the changes given above.

Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24
DEFINING THE FOCUS OF STUDY

What defines the focus of this book? What does it seek to do? How
is it linked to what has been studied in earlier classes?

In Classes VI to VII we looked at Indian history from early
beginnings to modern times, with a focus on one chronological
period in each year. Then in the books for Classes IX and X, the
frame of reference changed. We looked at a shorter period of time,
focusing specifically on a close study of the contemporary world.
We moved beyond territorial boundaries, beyond the limits of nation
states, to see how different people in different places have played
their part in the making of the modern world. The history of India
became connected to a wider inter-linked history. Subsequently in
Class XI we studied Themes in World History, expanding our
chronological focus, looking at the vast span of years from the
beginning of human life to the present, but selecting only a set of
themes for serious exploration. This year we will study Themes in
Indian History.

The book begins with Harappa and ends with the framing of the
Indian Constitution. What it offers is not a general survey of five
millennia, but a close study of select themes. The history books in
earlier years have already acquainted you with Indian history. It is
time we explored some themes in greater detail.

In choosing the themes we have tried to ensure that we learn
about developments in different spheres —- economic, cultural, social,
political, and religious — even as we attempt to break the boundaries
between them. Some themes in the book will introduce you to the
politics of the times and the nature of authority and power; others
explore the way societies are organised, and the way they function
and change; still others tell us about religious life and ritual
practices, about the working of economies, and the changes within
rural and urban societies.

Each of these themes will also allow you to have a closer look at
the historians’ craft. To retrieve the past, historians have to find
sources that make the past accessible. But sources do not just reveal
the past; historians have to grapple with sources, interpret them,
and make them speak. This is what makes history exciting. The
same sources can tell us new things if we ask new questions, and
engage with them in new ways. So we need to see how historians
read sources, and how they discover new things in old sources.

But historians do not only re-examine old records. They discover
new ones. Sometimes these could be chance discoveries.
Archaeologists may unexpectedly come across seals and mounds
that provide clues to the existence of a site of an ancient civilisation.
Rummaging through the dusty records of a district collectorate a

Rationalised 2023-24
x

historian may trip over a bundle of records that contain legal cases
of local disputes, and these may open up a new world of village life
several centuries back. Yet are such discoveries only accidents? You
may bump into a bundle of old records in an archive, open it up
and see it, without discovering the significance of the source. The
source may mean nothing to you unless you have relevant questions
in mind. You have to track the source, read the text, follow the clues,
and make the inter-connections before you can reconstruct the past.
The physical discovery of a record does not simply open up the
past. When Alexander Cunningham first saw a Harappan seal, he
could make no sense of it. Only much later was the significance of
the seals discovered.

In fact when historians begin to ask new questions, explore new
themes, they have to often search for new types of sources. If we
wish to know about revolutionaries and rebels, official sources can
reveal only a partial picture, one that will be shaped by official
censure and prejudice. We need to look for other sources — diaries
of rebels, their personal letters, their writings and pronouncements.
And these are not always easy to come by. If we have to understand
experiences of people, then oral sources might reveal more than
written sources.

As the vision of history broadens, historians begin tracking new
sources, searching for new clues to understand the past. And when
that happens, the conception of what constitutes a source itself
changes. There was a time when only written records were
acknowledged as authentic. What was written could be verified,
cited, and cross-checked. Oral evidence was never considered a valid
source: who was to guarantee its authenticity and verifiability? This
mistrust of oral sources has not yet disappeared, but oral evidence
has been innovatively used to uncover experiences that no other
record could reveal.

Through the book this year, you will enter the world of historians,
accompany them in their search for new clues, and see how they
carry on their dialogues with the past. You will witness the way they
tease out meaning out of records, read inscriptions, excavate
archaeological sites, make sense of beads and bones, interpret the
epics, look at the stupas and buildings, examine paintings and
photographs, interpret police reports and revenue records, and listen
to the voices of the past. Each theme will explore the peculiarities
and possibilities of one particular type of source. It will discuss what
a source can tell and what it cannot.

This is Part II, of Themes in Indian History. Part III will follow.

NEELADRI BHATTACHARYA
Chief Advisor, History

Rationalised 2023-24
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta, Kolkata

CHIEF ADVISOR
Neeladri Bhattacharya, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Theme 9)

ADVISORS
Kumkum Roy, Associate Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Monica Juneja, Guest Professor, Institut Furgeschichte, Viennna, Austria

TEAM MEMBERS

Jaya Menon, Reader, Department of History, Aligarh Muslim University,
Aligarh, UP (Theme 1)

Kumkum Roy (Theme 2)

Kunal Chakrabarti, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Theme 3)

Uma Chakravarti, Formerly Reader in History, Miranda House,
University of Delhi, Delhi (Theme 4)

Farhat Hassan, Reader, Department of History,
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, UP (Theme 5)

Meenakshi Khanna, Reader in History, Indraprastha College,
University of Delhi, Delhi (Theme 6)

Vijaya Ramaswamy, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Theme 7)

Rajat Datta, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Theme 8)

Najaf Haider, Associate Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University New Delhi

Rudrangshu Mukherjee, Executive Editor, The Telegraph, Kolkata (Theme 10)

Partho Dutta, Reader, Department of History, Zakir Hussain College
(Evening Classes), University of Delhi, Delhi

Ramachandra Guha, freelance writer, anthropologist and historian,
Bangalore (Theme 11)

Sumit Sarkar, Formerly Professor of History, University of Delhi, Delhi (Theme 12)

Muzaffar Alam, Professor of South Asian History,
University of Chicago, Chicago, USA

C.N. Subramaniam, Eklavya, Kothi Bazar, Hoshangabad

Rashmi Paliwal, Eklavya, Kothi Bazar, Hoshangabad

Prabha Singh, P.G.T: History, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Old Canitt.,
Telliarganj, Allahabad, UP

Smita Sahay Bhattacharya, P.G.T. History, Blue Bells School,
Kailash Colony, New Delhi

Beeba Sobti, P.G.T. History, Modern School, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi

MEMBER-COORDINATORS

Anil Sethi, Professor, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi
Seema Shukla Ojha, Lecturer, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi

Rationalised 2023-24
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Themes in Indian History, Part IThas, like Part I, benefited from the
enthusiastic participation and help of many people and institutions,
whom it is a pleasure to thank.

For valuable and extensive comments on draft chapters we are
immensely grateful to John Fritz, Sunil Kumar and Supriya Varma.
We would also like to thank Meena Bhargava, Ranabir Chakravarti,
Ranjeeta Datta, Bharati Jagannathan and Nandita Prasad Sahai
for their prompt help in clarifying issues. The suggestions made by
the members of the Monitoring Committee, Prof. J. S. Grewal and
Shobha Bajpai have been very useful.

Visual material for the book was provided by different individuals
and institutions. Above all we wish to thank George Michell and
John Fritz for their generosity in allowing us to draw upon their
rich pool of resources on Vijayanagara.

For careful copy-editing and reading of proofs we gratefully
acknowledge the efforts of Shyama Warner. Thanks are equally due
to Ritu Topa and Animesh Roy of Arrt Creations, New Delhi, who
designed the book with patience and skill. K. Varghese of Jawaharlal
Nehru University provided the maps. Albinus Tirkey and Manoj
Haldar offered technical support. Samira Varma has been a help in
many valuable ways, not least by remaining cheerful throughout.

Finally, we look forward to feedback from the users of the book,
which will help us improve it in subsequent editions.

The review committe members for the rationalisation of the
content of this textbook are Umesh Ashok Kadam, centre for
Historical studies, JNU, New Delhi; Svaril Kumar Singh, PGT History,
Kendriya Vidyalaya; Krishna Ranjan, PGT History, Kedriya Vidalaya;
Archana Verma, Dept. of History Hindu College, University of Delhi;
Shruti Mishra, PGT History, HoD, History, Delhi Public School;
Gouri Srivastava, Head, DESS; Pratyusa Khandal, DESS, NCERt;
Mily Roy Anand, Seema 8. Ojha, Sharad K. Pandey, DESS, NCERT.

The review committe members for the rationalisation of the
content of this textbook are Umesh Ashok Kadam, Centre for
Historical Studies, JNU, New Delhi; Sunil Kumar Singh, PGT History,
Kendriya Vidyalaya; Krishna Ranjan, PGT History, Kendriya
Vidyalaya; Archana Verma, Dept. of History, Hindu College,
University of Delhi; Shruti Mishra, PGT History, HoD, History, Delhi
Public School; Gouri Srivastava, Head, DESS; Pratyusa K. Mandal,
DESS, NCERT; Mily Roy Anand, Seema S. Ojha, Sharad K. Pandey,
DESS, NCERT.

Rationalised 2023-24
ee ee oe, ee ee

i
‘a
a
| i
Le
ke
&
I
le
|e
i
i
he
#
te
a
|
|i
i
k
i
ik
a
I
“a
le
|e
F
Wi
if
a
ly
|
ik
b
bo
be
i
k
”
I
Ke
le
k
k
k
k
fe
ae
ia
be
le
i
KF
Ff
le

PART II

THEME FIvE

THROUGH THE EYES OF TRAVELLERS
Perceptions of Society

(c. tenth to seventeenth century)

THEME SIx

BHAKTI- SUFI TRADITIONS
Changes in Religious Beliefs
and Devotional Texts

(c. eighth to eighteenth century)

THEME SEVEN

AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA
(c. fourteenth to sixteenth century)

THEME EIGHT

PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE
Agrarian Society and the Mughal Empire
(c. sixteenth-seventeenth centuries)

140

170

196

PART III*

THEME NINE
COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE
Exploring Official Archives

THEME TEN

REBELS AND THE RAJ
1857 Revolt and Its Representations

Rationalised 2023-24

* Part III will follow
THEME TWELVE

FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION
The Beginning of a New Era

PART I
(Pages 1-114)

THEME ONE

BRICKS, BEADS AND BONES
The Harappan Civilisation

THEME Two

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS
Early States and Economies

(c. 600 BcE -600 ce)

THEME THREE

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS
Early Societies
(c. 600 BcE- 600 cE)

THEME FourR

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS
Cultural Developments

(c. 600 BcE-600 cE)

Rationalised 2023-24
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
This is Part II of Themes in Indian History. Part III will follow.

¥] Each chapter is divided into numbered sections and
subsections to facilitate learning.

MJ You will also find other material enclosed in boxes.

These contain:

|

Short Additional More elaborate
meanings information definitions

These are meant to assist and enrich the learning process,
but are not intended for evaluation.

¥] Each chapter ends with a set of timelines. This is to be treated as
background information, and not for evaluation.

V1 There are Jigures, maps and sources numbered sequentially through
each chapter.

(a) Figures include illustrations of artefacts such as tools, pottery, seals,
coins, ornaments etc. as well as of inscriptions, sculptures, paintings,
buildings, archacological sites, plans and photographs of people and
places; visual material that historians use as sources.

(b) Some chapters have maps.

(c) Sources are enclosed within separate boxes: these contain
excerpts from a wide variety of texts and inscriptions. Both
visual and textual sources will help you acquire a feel for the

‘clues that historians use. You will also see how historians

| analyse these clues. The final examination can include
excerpts from and/or illustrations of identical/similar
material, providing you with an opportunity to handle
these.

Rationalised 2023-24
xvi

VI There are two categories of intext questions:

r a
l (a) those within a yellow box, which may be used for practice for
evaluation.

(b) those with the caption > Discuss... which are not for evaluation

M1 There are four types of assignments at the end of each chapter:

These include: 7
. | short questions O short essays

iy map work jy“? | projects

These are meant to provide practice for the final assessment and evaluation.

Hope you enjoy using this book.

Rationalised 2023-24
12094CHOS

THEME THROUGH THE EYES OF TRAVELLERS

FIVE PERCEPTIONS OF SOCIETY
(C. TENTH TO SEVENTEENTH CENTURY)

Women and men have travelled in search of work, to escape
from natural disasters, as traders, merchants, soldiers,
priests, pilgrims, or driven by a sense of adventure.
Those who visit or come to stay in a new land
invariably encounter a world that is different:
in terms of the landscape or physical
environment as well as customs, languages,
beliefs and practices of people. Many of them
try to adapt to these differences; others,
somewhat exceptional, note them carefully in
accounts, generally recording what they find
unusual or remarkable. Unfortunately, we have
practically no accounts of travel left by women, though

we know that they travelled.

The accounts that survive are often varied in terms of
their subject matter. Some deal with affairs of the court,
while others are mainly focused on religious issues, or
architectural features and monuments. For example, one
of the most important descriptions of the city of
Vijayanagara (Chapter 7) in the fifteenth century comes
from Abdur Razzaq Samarqandi, a diplomat who came
visiting from Herat.

In a few cases, travellers did not go to distant lands. For
example, in the Mughal Empire (Chapters 8 and 9),
administrators sometimes travelled within the
empire and recorded their observations. Some
of them were interested in looking at popular
customs and the folklore and traditions of
their own land.

In this chapter we shall see how our
knowledge of the past can be enriched
through a consideration of descriptions of
social life provided by travellers who visited
the subcontinent, focusing on the accounts of three Fig. 5.1b
men: Al-Biruni who came from Uzbekistan (eleventh A coconut
century), Ibn Battuta who came from Morocco, in The coconut and the paan
northwestern Africa (fourteenth century) and the Were things that struck many
Frenchman Francois Bernier (seventeenth century). travellers as unusual.

— Fig. 5.la
Paan leaves

Rationalised 2023-24
116

Source 1

Al-Biruni’s objectives

Al-Biruni described his work as:

a help to those who want to
discuss religious questions
with them (the Hindus), and
as a repertory of information
to those who want to
associate with them.

{ > Read the excerpt from

l Al-Biruni (Source 5) and |
discuss whether his work

' met these objectives.

Translating texts,

sharing ideas

Al-Biruni’s expertise in several
languages allowed him to
compare languages and
translate texts. He translated
several Sanskrit works, including
Patanjali’s work on grammar,
into Arabic. For his Brahmana
friends, he translated the
works of Euclid (a Greek
mathematician) into Sanskrit.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

As these authors came from vastly different
social and cultural environments, they were often
more attentive to everyday activities and practices
which were taken for granted by indigenous
writers, for whom these were routine matters, not
worthy of being recorded. It is this difference in
perspective that makes the accounts of travellers
interesting. Who did these travellers write for? As
we will see, the answers vary from one instance
to the next.

1. AL-BIRUNI AND THE
KITAB-UL-HIND

1.1 From Khwarizm to the Punjab

Al-Biruni was born in 973, in Khwarizm in present-
day Uzbekistan. Khwarizm was an important centre
of learning, and Al-Biruni received the best
education available at the time. He was well versed
in several languages: Syriac, Arabic, Persian,
Hebrew and Sanskrit. Although he did not know
Greek, he was familiar with the works of Plato
and other Greek philosophers, having read
them in Arabic translations. In 1017, when Sultan
Mahmud invaded Khwarizm, he took several
scholars and poets back to his capital, Ghazni;
Al-Biruni was one of them. He arrived in Ghazni as
a hostage, but gradually developed a liking for the
city, where he spent the rest of his life until his
death at the age of 70.

It was in Ghazni that Al-Biruni developed an
interest in India. This was not unusual. Sanskrit
works on astronomy, mathematics and medicine had
been translated into Arabic from the eighth century
onwards. When the Punjab became a part of the
Ghaznavid empire, contacts with the local population
helped create an environment of mutual trust and
understanding. Al-Biruni spent years in the company
of Brahmana priests and scholars, learning Sanskrit,
and studying religious and philosophical texts. While
his itinerary is not clear, it is likely that he travelled
widely in the Punjab and parts of northern India.

Travel literature was already an accepted part of
Arabic literature by the time he wrote. This literature
dealt with lands as far apart as the Sahara desert
in the west to the River Volga in the north. So, while

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

few people in India would have read Al-Biruni before
1500, many others outside India may have done so.

1.2 The Kitab-ul-Hind

Al-Biruni’s Kitab-ul-Hind, written in Arabic, is simple
and lucid. It is a voluminous text, divided into
80 chapters on subjects such as religion and
philosophy, festivals, astronomy, alchemy, manners
and customs, social life, weights and measures,
iconography, laws and metrology.

Generally (though not always), Al-Biruni adopted
a distinctive structure in each chapter, beginning
with a question, following this up with a description
based on Sanskritic traditions, and concluding
with a comparison with other cultures. Some
present-day scholars have argued that this almost
geometric structure, remarkable for its precision and
predictability, owed much to his mathematical
orientation.

Al-Biruni, who wrote in Arabic, probably intended
his work for peoples living along the frontiers of the
subcontinent. He was familiar with translations
and adaptations of Sanskrit, Pali and Prakrit texts
into Arabic — these ranged from fables to works on
astronomy and medicine. However, he was also
critical about the ways in which these texts were
written, and clearly wanted to improve on them.

Rationalised 2023-24

117

Metrology is the science of
measurement.

Hindu

The term “Hindu” was derived
from an Old Persian word,
used c. sixth-fifth centuries
BCE, to refer to the region east
of the river Sindhu (Indus).
The Arabs continued the
Persian usage and called this
region “al-Hind” and its
people “Hindi”. Later the
Turks referred to the people
east of the Indus as “Hindu”,
their land as “Hindustan”, and
their language as “Hindavi’.
None of these expressions
indicated the religious identity
of the people. It was much
later that the term developed
religious connotations.

> Discuss...

If Al-Biruni lived in the
twenty-first century, which
are the areas of the world
where he could have been
easily understood, if he still
knew the same languages?

Fig. 5.2

century Arabic manuscript
showing the Athenian
statesman and poet Solon, who
lived in the sixth century BCE,
addressing his students
Notice the clothes they are
shown in.

> Are these clothes Greek
L or Arabian?

An illustration from a thirteenth-

Ce 7
118

Source 2

The bird leaves its nest

This is an excerpt from the Rihla:

My departure from Tangier,
my birthplace, took place on
Thursday ... set out alone,
having neither fellow-
traveller ... nor caravan
whose party I might join, but
swayed by an overmastering
impulse within me and a
desire long-cherished in my
bosom to visit these
illustrious sanctuaries. So |
braced my resolution to quit
all my dear ones, female and
male, and forsook my home
as birds forsake their nests ...
My age at that time was
twenty-two years.

Ibn Battuta returned home in
1354, about 30 years after he
had set out.

Fig. 5.3

Robbers attacking travellers, a

sixteenth-century Mughal painting

CT 7
> How can you distinguish the |

[ eaawellers from the robbers?

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

2. IBN BATTUTA’S RIHLA

2.1 An early globe-trotter

Ibn Battuta’s book of travels, called Rihla, written in
Arabic, provides extremely rich and interesting
details about the social and cultural life in the
subcontinent in the fourteenth century. This
Moroccan traveller was born in Tangier into one of
the most respectable and educated families known
for their expertise in Islamic religious law or shari‘a.
True to the tradition of his family, Ibn Battuta
received literary and scholastic education when he
was quite young.

Unlike most other members of his class, Ibn
Battuta considered experience gained through travels
to be a more important source of knowledge than
books. He just loved travelling, and went to far-off
places, exploring new worlds and peoples. Before he
set off for India in 1332-33, he had made pilgrimage
trips to Mecca, and had already travelled extensively
in Syria, Iraq, Persia, Yemen, Oman and a few
trading ports on the coast of East Africa.

Travelling overland through Central Asia, Ibn
Battuta reached Sind in 1333. He had heard
about Muhammad bin Tughlaq, the Sultan of Delhi,
and lured by his reputation as a generous patron
of arts and letters, set off for Delhi, passing through
Multan and Uch. The Sultan was impressed by
his scholarship, and appointed him the gazi or judge
of Delhi. He remained in that position for several
years, until he fell out of favour and was thrown
into prison. Once the misunderstanding between
him and the Sultan was cleared, he was
restored to imperial service, and was
ordered in 1342 to proceed to China as the
Sultan’s envoy to the Mongol ruler.

With the new assignment, Ibn Battuta
proceeded to the Malabar coast through
central India. From Malabar he went to
the Maldives, where he stayed for eighteen
months as the gazi, but eventually decided
to proceed to Sri Lanka. He then went back
once more to the Malabar coast and the
Maldives, and before resuming his mission
to China, visited Bengal and Assam as well.
He took a ship to Sumatra, and from there
another ship for the Chinese port town of

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

Zaytun (now known as Quanzhou). He travelled
extensively in China, going as far as Beijing, but did
not stay for long, deciding to return home in 1347.
His account is often compared with that of Marco
Polo, who visited China (and also India) from his
home base in Venice in the late thirteenth century.

Ibn Battuta meticulously recorded his observations
about new cultures, peoples, beliefs, values, etc.
We need to bear in mind that this globe-trotter was
travelling in the fourteenth century, when it was
much more arduous and hazardous to travel than it
is today. According to Ibn Battuta, it took forty days
to travel from Multan to Delhi and about fifty days
from Sind to Delhi. The distance from Daulatabad
to Delhi was covered in forty days, while that from
Gwalior to Delhi took ten days.

Fig. 5.4

A boat carrying passengers,

a terracotta sculpture from

a temple in Bengal

(c. seventeenth-eighteenth centuries)

7
> Why do you think some of
the passengers are carrying
arms?

T

he lonely traveller

Robbers were not the only hazard on long journeys: the traveller could feel homesick,

or fall ill. Here is an excerpt from the Rihla:

I was attacked by the fever, and I actually tied myself on the saddle with a turban-

cloth in case | should fall off by reason of my weakness ..

. So at last we reached

the town of Tunis, and the townsfolk came out to welcome the shaikh ... and ...
the son of the gazi... On all sides they came forward with greetings and questions
to one another, but not a soul said a word of greeting to me, since there was none
of them I knew. I felt so sad at heart on account of my loneliness that I could not
restrain the tears that started to my eyes, and wept bitterly. But one of the pilgrims,
realising the cause of my distress, came up to me with a greeting ...

Rationalised 2023-24
120

Map 1
Places visited by A e Tirmidh
Ibn Battuta in Amelainayy * ® Qunduz
Afghanistan, Balkh
Sind and Punjab. 4
Many of the
® Parwan
place-names :
have been spelt as * kabul
Ibn Battuta would
have known them. ® Ghazna
Qandahar
e e z
gut
Ajudahan
ei ne Abuhar
/ Multan Tk .
if
roe | 5 / Sarasati
| > Use the scale on the map to | JE" Via Hans Deni
| calculate the distance in miles | Z =
| between Multan and Delhi.
—aeee 4
Yi
/
e
4
} 0 100 200 300
f ——
ARABIAN SEA Lahari A,
Sketch map not to scale

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Travelling was also more insecure: Ibn Battuta
was attacked by bands of robbers several times.
In fact he preferred travelling in a caravan along
with companions, but this did not deter highway
robbers. While travelling from Multan to Delhi,
for instance, his caravan was attacked and many
of his fellow travellers lost their lives; those
travellers who survived, including Ibn Battuta,
were severely wounded.

2.2 The “enjoyment of curiosities”

As we have seen, Ibn Battuta was an inveterate
traveller who spent several years travelling through
north Africa, West Asia and parts of Central Asia
(he may even have visited Russia), the Indian
subcontinent and China, before returning to his
native land, Morocco. When he returned, the local
ruler issued instructions that his stories be recorded.

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS 121

Source 3

Education and entertainment

This is what Ibn Juzayy, who was deputed to write what
Ibn Battuta dictated, said in his introduction:

A gracious direction was transmitted (by the ruler)
that he (Ibn Battuta) should dictate an account of
the cities which he had seen in his travel, and of
the interesting events which had clung to his
memory, and that he should speak of those whom
he had met of the rulers of countries, of their
distinguished men of learning, and their pious saints.
Accordingly, he dictated upon these subjects a
narrative which gave entertainment to the mind
and delight to the ears and eyes, with a variety of
curious particulars by the exposition of which he
gave edification and of marvellous things, by
referring to which he aroused interest.

In the footsteps of Ibn Battuta

In the centuries between 1400 and 1800 visitors to India
wrote a number of travelogues in Persian. At the same
time, Indian visitors to Central Asia, Iran and the Ottoman
empire also sometimes wrote about their experiences.
These writers followed in the footsteps of Al-Biruni and
Ibn Battuta, and had sometimes read these earlier authors.

Among the best known of these writers were Abdur
Razzaq Samargqandi, who visited south India in the 1440s,
Mahmud Wali Balkhi, who travelled very widely in the
1620s, and Shaikh Ali Hazin, who came to north India in
the 1740s. Some of these authors were fascinated by India,
and one of them — Mahmud Balkhi- even became a sort
of sanyasi for a time. Others such as Hazin were
disappointed and even disgusted with India, where they
expected to receive a red carpet treatment. Most of them
saw India as a land of wonders.

Fig. 5.5

An eighteenth-century painting
depicting travellers gathered
around a campfire

> Discuss...

Compare the objectives of Al-Biruni and
Ibn Battuta in writing their accounts.

Rationalised 2023-24
122

Fig. 5.6

A seventeenth-century painting
depicting Bernier in European
clothes

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

3. FRANCOIS BERNIER

A DOCTOR WITH A DIFFERENCE

Once the Portuguese arrived in India in about 1500,
a number of them wrote detailed accounts regarding
Indian social customs and religious practices. A few
of them, such as the Jesuit Roberto Nobili, even
translated Indian texts into European languages.

Among the best known of the Portuguese writers
is Duarte Barbosa, who wrote a detailed account of
trade and society in south India. Later, after 1600,
we find growing numbers of Dutch, English and
French travellers coming to India. One of the most
famous was the French jeweller Jean-Baptiste
Tavernier, who travelled to India at least six times.
He was particularly fascinated with the trading
conditions in India, and compared India to Iran and
the Ottoman empire. Some of these travellers, like
the Italian doctor Manucci, never returned to Europe,
and settled down in India.

Francois Bernier, a Frenchman, was a doctor,
political philosopher and historian. Like many
others, he came to the Mughal Empire in search of
opportunities. He was in India for twelve years, from
1656 to 1668, and was closely associated with the
Mughal court, as a physician to Prince Dara Shukoh,
the eldest son of Emperor Shah Jahan, and later as
an intellectual and scientist, with Danishmand
Khan, an Armenian noble at the Mughal court.

3.1 Comparing “East” and “West”

Bernier travelled to several parts of the country, and
wrote accounts of what he saw, frequently comparing
what he saw in India with the situation in Europe.
He dedicated his major writing to Louis XIV, the
king of France, and many of his other works were
written in the form of letters to influential officials
and ministers. In virtually every instance Bernier
described what he saw in India as a bleak situation
in comparison to developments in Europe. As we
will see, this assessment was not always accurate.
However, when his works were published, Bernier’s
writings became extremely popular.

Fig. 5.7
A painting depicting Tavernier in Indian clothes

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

Source 4

Travelling with the Mughal army

Bernier often travelled with the army. This is an excerpt
from his description of the army’s march to Kashmir:

Iam expected to keep two good Turkoman horses, and
Talso take with me a powerful Persian camel and driver,
a groom for my horses, a cook and a servant to go
before my horse with a flask of water in his hand,
according to the custom of the country. I am also
provided with every useful article, such as a tent of
moderate size, a carpet, a portable bed made of four
very strong but light canes, a pillow, a mattress, round
leather table-cloths used at meals, some few napkins of
dyed cloth, three small bags with culinary utensils which
are all placed in a large bag, and this bag is again carried
in a very capacious and strong double sack or net made
of leather thongs. This double sack likewise contains
the provisions, linen and wearing apparel, both of
master and servants. I have taken care to layin a stock
of excellent rice for five or six days’ consumption, of
sweet biscuits flavoured with anise (a herb), of limes
and sugar. Nor have I forgotten a linen bag with its
small iron hook for the purpose of suspending and
draining dahi or curds; nothing being considered so
refreshing in this country as lemonade and dahi.

r

> What are the things from Bernier’s list
that you would take on a journey today?

Bernier’s works were published in France in
1670-71 and translated into English, Dutch, German
and Italian within the next five years. Between 1670
and 1725 his account was reprinted eight times in
French, and by 1684 it had been reprinted three
times in English. This was in marked contrast to
the accounts in Arabic and Persian, which circulated
as manuscripts and were generally not published
before 1800.

Rationalised 2023-24

123

The creation and

circulation of ideas
about India

The writings of European
travellers helped produce an
image of India for Europeans
through the printing and
circulation of their books.
Later, after 1750, when Indians
like Shaikh Itisamuddin and
Mirza Abu Talib visited Europe
and confronted this image
that Europeans had of their
society, they tried to influence
it by producing their own
version of matters.

> Discuss...

There is a very rich travel
literature in Indian
languages. Find out about
travel writers in the language
you use at home. Read one
such account and describe
the areas visited by the
traveller, what s/he saw, and
why s/he wrote the account.
124

' A language with an_ |

enormous range

Al-Biruni described Sanskrit as
follows:

If you want to conquer this
difficulty G.e. to learn
Sanskrit), you will not find
it easy, because the
language is of an enormous
range, both in words and
inflections, something like
the Arabic, calling one and
the same thing by various
names, both original and
derivative, and using one
and the same word for a
variety of subjects, which,
in order to be properly
understood, must be
distinguished from each
other by various qualifying
epithets.

G

od knows best!

Travellers did not always believe
what they were told. When
faced with the story of a wooden
idol that supposedly lasted for
216,432 years, Al-Biruni asks:

How, then, could wood
have lasted such a length of
time, and particularly in a
place where the air and the
soil are rather wet? God
knows best!

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

4. MAKING SENSE OF AN ALIEN WORLD
AL-BIRUNI AND THE SANSKRITIC
TRADITION

4.1 Overcoming barriers to understanding

As we have seen, travellers often compared what
they saw in the subcontinent with practices
with which they were familiar. Each traveller
adopted distinct strategies to understand what they
observed. Al-Biruni, for instance, was aware of the
problems inherent in the task he had set himself.
He discussed several “barriers” that he felt
obstructed understanding. The first amongst these
was language. According to him, Sanskrit was so
different from Arabic and Persian that ideas and
concepts could not be easily translated from one
language into another.

The second barrier he identified was the difference
in religious beliefs and practices. The self-absorption
and consequent insularity of the local population
according to him, constituted the third barrier.
What is interesting is that even though he was aware
of these problems, Al-Biruni depended almost
exclusively on the works of Brahmanas, often citing
passages from the Vedas, the Puranas, the Bhagavad
Gita, the works of Patanjali, the Manusmriti, etc., to
provide an understanding of Indian society.

4.2 Al-Biruni’s description of the caste system
Al-Biruni tried to explain the caste system by looking
for parallels in other societies. He noted that in
ancient Persia, four social categories were
recognised: those of knights and princes; monks,
fire-priests and lawyers; physicians, astronomers
and other scientists; and finally, peasants and
artisans. In other words, he attempted to suggest
that social divisions were not unique to India. At
the same time he pointed out that within Islam all
men were considered equal, differing only in their
observance of piety.

In spite of his acceptance of the Brahmanical
description of the caste system, Al-Biruni disapproved
of the notion of pollution. He remarked that
everything which falls into a state of impurity strives
and succeeds in regaining its original condition of
purity. The sun cleanses the air, and the salt in the
sea prevents the water from becoming polluted. If it

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

were not so, insisted Al-Biruni, life on earth would
have been impossible. The conception of social
pollution, intrinsic to the caste system, was
according to him, contrary to the laws of nature.

Source 5

The system of varnas

This is Al-Biruni’s account of the system of varnas:

The highest caste are the Brahmana, of whom the
books of the Hindus tell us that they were created from
the head of Brahman. And as the Brahman is only
another name for the force called nature, and the head
is the highest part of the ... body, the Brahmana are the
choice part of the whole genus. Therefore the Hindus
consider them as the very best of mankind.

The next caste are the Kshatriya, who were created,
as they say, from the shoulders and hands of Brahman.
Their degree is not much below that of the Brahmana.

After them follow the Vaishya, who were created from
the thigh of Brahman.

The Shudra, who were created from his feet...

Between the latter two classes there is no very
great distance. Much, however, as these classes
differ from each other, they live together in the
same towns and villages, mixed together in the same
houses and lodgings.

As we have seen, Al-Biruni’s description of the
caste system was deeply influenced by his study
of normative Sanskrit texts which laid down the rules
governing the system from the point of view of
the Brahmanas. However, in real life the system
was not quite as rigid. For instance, the categories
defined as antyaja (literally, born outside the system)
were often expected to provide inexpensive labour to
both peasants and zamindars (see also Chapter 8).
In other words, while they were often subjected to
social oppression, they were included within
economic networks.

Rationalised 2023-24

125

> Compare what Al-Biruni
wrote with Source 6, Chapter 3.
Do you notice any similarities
and differences? Do you think
Al-Biruni depended only on
Sanskrit texts for his
information and understanding
of Indian society?

> Discuss...

How important is knowledge
of the language of the area for
a traveller from a different
region?
126

Source 6

Nuts like a man’s head

The following is how Ibn Battuta

described the coconut:

-
|

These trees are among the
most peculiar trees in kind
and most astonishing in
habit. They look exactly
like date-palms, without
any difference between
them except that the one
produces nuts as its fruits
and the other produces
dates. The nut of a coconut
tree resembles a man’s
head, for in it are what look
like two eyes and a mouth,
and the inside of it when it is
green looks like the brain,
and attached to it is a fibre
which looks like hair. They
make from this cords with
which they sew up ships
instead of (using) iron nails,
and they (also) make from it
cables for vessels.

> What are the
comparisons that Ibn
Battuta makes to give his
readers an idea about
what coconuts looked
like? Do you think these
are appropriate? How
does he convey a sense
that this fruit is unusual?
How accurate is his

description?
L

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

5. IBN BATTUTA AND THE EXCITEMENT

OF THE UNFAMILIAR

By the time Ibn Battuta arrived in Delhi in the
fourteenth century, the subcontinent was part of a
global network of communication that stretched from
China in the east to north-west Africa and Europe
in the west. As we have seen, Ibn Battuta himself
travelled extensively through these lands, visiting
sacred shrines, spending time with learned men and
rulers, often officiating as gqazi, and enjoying the
cosmopolitan culture of urban centres where people
who spoke Arabic, Persian, Turkish and other
languages, shared ideas, information and anecdotes.
These included stories about men noted for their
piety, kings who could be both cruel and generous,
and about the lives of ordinary men and women;
anything that was unfamiliar was particularly
highlighted in order to ensure that the listener or
the reader was suitably impressed by accounts of
distant yet accessible worlds.

5.1 The coconut and the paan

Some of the best examples of Ibn Battuta’s strategies
of representation are evident in the ways in which
he described the coconut and the paan, two kinds of
plant produce that were completely unfamiliar to
his audience.

Source 7

Read Ibn Battuta’s description of the paan:

The betel is a tree which is cultivated in the same
manner as the grape-vine; ... The betel has no fruit
and is grown only for the sake of its leaves ... The
manner of its use is that before eating it one takes
areca nut; this is like a nutmeg but is broken up until it
is reduced to small pellets, and one places these in his
mouth and chews them. Then he takes the leaves of
betel, puts a little chalk on them, and masticates them
along with the betel.

r

> Why do you think this attracted Ibn

Battuta’s attention? Is there anything you

_ would like to add to this description?

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS 127

5.2 Ibn Battuta and Indian cities
Ibn Battuta found cities in the subcontinent full of
exciting opportunities for those who had the
necessary drive, resources and skills. They were
densely populated and prosperous, except for the
occasional disruptions caused by wars and
invasions. It appears from Ibn Battuta’s account that
most cities had crowded streets and bright and
colourful markets that were stacked with a wide | 2 Whetwere theandaitesral |
variety of goods. Ibn Battuta described Delhi as a

) = ° : . | features that Ibn Battuta
vast city, with a great population, the largest in India. avail?
Daulatabad (in Maharashtra) was no less, and easily

rivalled Delhi in size. the illustrations of the city

|
| Compare this description with !
| shown in Figs. 5.8 and 5.9. |

Source 8

Here is an excerpt from Ibn Battuta’s account of Delhi, often spelt as Dehli in texts
of the period:

The city of Dehli covers a wide area and has a large population ...

The rampart round the city is without parallel. The breadth ofits wall

is eleven cubits; and inside it are houses for the night sentry and gate-

Keepers. Inside the ramparts, there are store-houses for storing edibles,

magazines, ammunition, ballistas and siege machines. The grains that

are stored (in these ramparts) can last for a long time, without rotting

... In the interior of the rampart, horsemen as well as infantrymen

move from one end of the city to another. The rampart is pierced

through by windows which open on the side of the city, and it is

through these windows that light enters inside. The lower part of the

rampart is built of stone; the upper part of bricks. It has many towers

close to one another. There are twenty eight gates of this city which

are called darwaza, and of these, the Budaun darwazais the greatest;

inside the Mandwi darwaza there is a grain market; adjacent to the

Gul darwaza there is an orchard ... It (the city of Dehli) has a fine cemetery in which graves have

domes over them, and those that do not have a dome, have an arch, for sure. In the cemetery
they sow flowers such
as tuberose, jasmine,
wild rose, etc.; and
flowers blossom there
in all seasons.

Fig. 5.8 (top)
An arch in Tughlakabad,
Dethi

Fig. 5.9 (left)
Part of the fortification
wall of the settlement

Rationalised 2023-24
128

Fig. 5.10

Ikat weaving patterns such as this
were adopted and modified at
several coastal production centres
in the subcontinent and in
Southeast Asia.

poe eee
| > Why do you think Ibn

| Battuta highlighted these
| activities in his description?

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

The bazaars were not only places of economic
transactions, but also the hub of social and cultural
activities. Most bazaars had a mosque and a temple,
and in some of them at least, spaces were marked for
public performances by dancers, musicians and singers.

While Ibn Battuta was not particularly concerned
with explaining the prosperity of towns, historians have
used his account to suggest that towns derived a
significant portion of their wealth through the
appropriation of surplus from villages. Ibn Battuta
found Indian agriculture very productive because of
the fertility of the soil, which allowed farmers to
cultivate two crops a year. He also noted that the
subcontinent was well integrated with inter-Asian
networks of trade and commerce, with Indian
manufactures being in great demand in both West Asia
and Southeast Asia, fetching huge profits for artisans
and merchants. Indian textiles, particularly cotton
cloth, fine muslins, silks, brocade and satin, were in
great demand. Ibn Battuta informs us that certain
varieties of fine muslin were so expensive that they
could be worn only by the nobles and the very rich.

Source 9

Music in the market

Read Ibn Battuta’s description of Daulatabad:

In Daulatabad there is a market place for male and
female singers, which is known as Tarababad. It is one
of the greatest and most beautiful bazaars. It has
numerous shops and every shop has a door which
leads into the house of the owner ... The shops are
decorated with carpets and at the centre of a shop
there is a swing on which sits the female singer. She is
decked with all kinds of finery and her female attendants
swing her. In the middle of the market place there stands
a large cupola, which is carpeted and decorated and
in which the chief of the musicians takes his place every
Thursday after the dawn prayers, accompanied by his
servants and slaves. The female singers come in
successive crowds, sing before him and dance until
dusk after which he withdraws. In this bazaar there are
mosques for offering prayers ... One of the Hindu rulers
... alighted at the cupola every time he passed by this
market place, and the female singers would sing before
him. Even some Muslim rulers did the same.

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

5.3 A unique system of communication

The state evidently took special measures to
encourage merchants. Almost all trade routes were
well supplied with inns and guest houses. Ibn
Battuta was also amazed by the efficiency of the
postal system which allowed merchants to not only
send information and remit credit across long
distances, but also to dispatch goods required at
short notice. The postal system was so efficient that
while it took fifty days to reach Delhi from Sind,
the news reports of spies would reach the Sultan
through the postal system in just five days.

Source 10

On horse and on foot

This is how Ibn Battuta describes the postal system:

In India the postal system is of two kinds. The horse-

post, called uluq, is run by royal horses stationed at a

distance of every four miles. The foot-post has three |
stations per mile; it is called dawa, that is one-third ofa
mile ... Now, at every third of a mile there is a well-
populated village, outside which are three pavilions in
which sit men with girded loins ready to start. Each of
them carries a rod, two cubits in length, with copper
bells at the top. When the courier starts from the city
he holds the letter in one hand and the rod with its
bells on the other; and he runs as fast ashe can. When
the men in the pavilion hear the ringing of the bell they
get ready. As soon as the courier reaches them, one of
them takes the letter from his hand and runs at top
speed shaking the rod all the while until he reaches
the next dawa. And the same process continues till the
letter reaches its destination. This foot-post is quicker
than the horse-post; and often it is used to transport
the fruits of Khurasan which are much desired in India.

a a Ne 7
> Do you think the foot-post system could
have operated throughout the subcontinent?

L

> Discuss...

How did Ibn Battuta handle the problem of
describing things or situations to people who
had not seen or experienced them?

Rationalised 2023-24

129

A strange nation?

The travelogue of Abdur Razzaq
written in the 1440s is an
interesting mixture of emotions
and perceptions. On the one
hand, he did not appreciate
what he saw in the port of
Calicut (present-day Kozhikode)
in Kerala, which was populated
by “a people the likes of whom |
had never imagined”, describing
them as “a strange nation’.
Later in his visit to India, he
arrived in Mangalore, and
crossed the Western Ghats. Here
he saw a temple that filled him
with admiration:
Within three leagues (about
nine miles of Mangalore, I
saw an idol-house the likes
of which is not to be found
in all the world. It was a
square, approximately ten
yards a side, five yards in
height, all covered with cast
bronze, with four porticos.
In the entrance portico was
a statue in the likeness of a
human being, full stature,
made of gold. It had two
red rubies for eyes, so
cunningly made that you
would say it could see.
What craft and artisanship!
130

W:

idespread poverty

Pelsaert, a Dutch traveller, visited
the subcontinent during the early
decades of the seventeenth
century. Like Bernier, he was
shocked to see the widespread
poverty, “poverty so great and
miserable that the life of the
people can be depicted or
accurately described only as the
home of stark want and the
dwelling place of bitter woe’.
Holding the state responsible,
he says: “So much is wrung
from the peasants that even dry
bread is scarcely left to fill
their stomachs.”

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

6. BERNIER AND THE “DEGENERATE”
EAST

If Ibn Battuta chose to describe everything that
impressed and excited him because of its novelty,
Francois Bernier belonged to a different intellectual
tradition. He was far more preoccupied with
comparing and contrasting what he saw in India
with the situation in Europe in general and France
in particular, focusing on situations which he
considered depressing. His idea seems to have been
to influence policy-makers and the intelligentsia to
ensure that they made what he considered to be the
“right” decisions.

Bernier’s Travels in the Mughal Empire is marked
by detailed observations, critical insights and
reflection. His account contains discussions trying
to place the history of the Mughals within some sort
of a universal framework. He constantly compared
Mughal India with contemporary Europe, generally
emphasising the superiority of the latter. His
representation of India works on the model of
binary opposition, where India is presented as the
inverse of Europe. He also ordered the perceived
differences hierarchically, so that India appeared to
be inferior to the Western world.

6.1 The question of landownership

According to Bernier, one of the fundamental
differences between Mughal India and Europe was
the lack of private property in land in the former.
He was a firm believer in the virtues of private
property, and saw crown ownership of land as
being harmful for both the state and its people. He
thought that in the Mughal Empire the emperor
owned all the land and distributed it among his
nobles, and that this had disastrous consequences
for the economy and society. This perception was
not unique to Bernier, but is found in most
travellers’ accounts of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries.

Owing to crown ownership of land, argued Bernier,
landholders could not pass on their land to their
children. So they were averse to any long-term
investment in the sustenance and expansion of
production. The absence of private property in land
had, therefore, prevented the emergence of the class
of “improving” landlords (as in Western Europe) with

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

a concern to maintain or improve the land. It had
led to the uniform ruination of agriculture, excessive
oppression of the peasantry and a continuous decline
in the living standards of all sections of society, except
the ruling aristocracy.

Source 11

The poor peasant

An excerpt from Bernier’s description of the peasantry in
the countryside:

Of the vast tracts of country constituting the empire of
Hindustan, many are little more than sand, or barren
mountains, badly cultivated, and thinly populated.
Even a considerable portion of the good land remains
untilled for want of labourers; many of whom perish in
consequence of the bad treatment they experience
from Governors. The poor people, when they become
incapable of discharging the demands of their
rapacious lords, are not only often deprived of the
means of subsistence, but are also made to lose their
children, who are carried away as slaves. Thus, it
happens that the peasantry, driven to despair by so
excessive a tyranny, abandon the country.

In this instance, Bernier was participating in
contemporary debates in Europe concerning the nature
of state and society, and intended that his description of
Mughal India would serve as a warning to those who did
not recognise the “merits” of private property.

> What, according to Bernier, were the
problems faced by peasants in the
subcontinent? Do you think his description
would have served to strengthen his case?

As an extension of this, Bernier described Indian
society as consisting of undifferentiated masses of
impoverished people, subjugated by a small minority
of a very rich and powerful ruling class. Between
the poorest of the poor and the richest of the rich,
there was no social group or class worth the name.
Bernier confidently asserted: “There is no middle
state in India.”

Rationalised 2023-24

131

Fig. 5.11
Drawings such as this
nineteenth-century example
often reinforced the notion of
an unchanging rural society.

132

Source 12

A warning for Europe

if
European kings followed the
Mughal model:

Bernier

-
|

warned that

Their kingdoms would be
very far from being well-
cultivated and peopled,
so well built, so rich, so
polite and flourishing as
we see them. Our kings
are otherwise rich and
powerful; and we must
avow that they are much
better and more royally
served. They would soon be
kings of deserts and
solitudes, of beggars and
barbarians, such as those
are whom I have been
representing (the Mughals)

. We should find the
great Cities and the great
Burroughs (boroughs)
rendered uninhabitable
because of ill air, and to
fall to ruine (ruin) without
any bodies (anybody) taking
care of repairing them;
the hillocks abandon’d,
and the fields overspread
with bushes, or fill’d
with pestilential marishes
(marshes), as hath been
already intimated.

> How does Bernier depict |

a scenario of doom?
Once you have read
Chapters 8 and 9, return
to this description and

| analyse it again.
L

14a

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

This, then, is how Bernier saw the Mughal Empire
— its king was the king of “beggars and barbarians”;
its cities and towns were ruined and contaminated
with “ill air’; and its fields, “overspread with bushes”
and full of “pestilential marishes”. And, all this was
because of one reason: crown ownership of land.

Curiously, none of the Mughal official documents
suggest that the state was the sole owner of land.
For instance, Abu’l Fazl, the sixteenth-century
official chronicler of Akbar’s reign, describes the land
revenue as “remunerations of sovereignty”, a claim
made by the ruler on his subjects for the protection
he provided rather than as rent on land that he
owned. It is possible that European travellers
regarded such claims as rent because land revenue
demands were often very high. However, this was
actually not a rent or even a land tax, but a tax on
the crop (for more details, see Chapter 8).

Bernier’s descriptions influenced Western
theorists from the eighteenth century onwards. The
French philosopher Montesquieu, for instance, used
this account to develop the idea of oriental despotism,
according to which rulers in Asia (the Orient or the
East) enjoyed absolute authority over their subjects,
who were kept in conditions of subjugation and
poverty, arguing that all land belonged to the king
and that private property was non-existent.
According to this view, everybody, except the emperor
and his nobles, barely managed to survive.

This idea was further developed as the concept of
the Asiatic mode of production by Karl Marx in the
nineteenth century. He argued that in India (and
other Asian countries), before colonialism, surplus
was appropriated by the state. This led to the
emergence of a society that was composed of a large
number of autonomous and (internally) egalitarian
village communities. The imperial court presided
over these village communities, respecting their
autonomy as long as the flow of surplus was
unimpeded. This was regarded as a stagnant system.

However, as we will see (Chapter 8), this picture
of rural society was far from true. In fact, during
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, rural
society was characterised by considerable social and
economic differentiation. At one end of the spectrum
were the big zamindars, who enjoyed superior rights
in land and, at the other, the “untouchable” landless

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

labourers. In between was the big peasant, who used
hired labour and engaged in commodity production, and
the smaller peasant who could barely produce for his
subsistence.

6.2 A more complex social reality

While Bernier’s preoccupation with projecting the
Mughal state as tyrannical is obvious, his descriptions
occasionally hint at a more complex social reality. For
instance, he felt that artisans had no incentive to
improve the quality of their manufactures, since profits
were appropriated by the state. Manufactures were,
consequently, everywhere in decline. At the same time,
he conceded that vast quantities of the world’s precious
metals flowed into India, as manufactures were exported
in exchange for gold and silver. He also noticed the
existence of a prosperous merchant community,
engaged in long-distance exchange.

Source 13

A different socio-economic scenario

Read this excerpt from Bernier’s description of both
agriculture and craft production:

It is important to observe, that of this vast tract of country,
a large portion is extremely fertile; the large kingdom of
Bengale (Bengal), for instance, surpassing Egypt itself, not
only in the production of rice, corn, and other necessaries
of life, but of innumerable articles of commerce which are
not cultivated in Egypt; such as silks, cotton, and indigo.
There are also many parts of the Indies, where the
population is sufficiently abundant, and the land pretty well
tilled; and where the artisan, although naturally indolent,
is yet compelled by necessity or otherwise to employ himself
in manufacturing carpets, brocades, embroideries, gold
and silver cloths, and the various sorts of silk and cotton
goods, which are used in the country or exported abroad.

It should not escape notice that gold and silver, after
circulating in every other quarter of the globe, come at
length to be swallowed up, lost in some measure, in
Hindustan.

CT TTT TT TT TT TTT TTT TT 7
l > In what ways is the description in this excerpt

different from that in Source 11?

Rationalised 2023-24

133

Fig. 5.12

A gold spoon studded with
emeralds and rubies, an
example of the dexterity of
Mughal artisans
134

Source 14

The imperial karkhanas

Bernier is perhaps the only
historian who provides a detailed
account of the working of
the imperial karkhanas or
workshops:

Large halls are seen
at many places, called
karkhanas or workshops
for the artisans. In one hall,
embroiderers are busily
employed, superintended
by a master. In another,
you see the goldsmiths; in a
third, painters; in a fourth,
varnishers in lacquer-work;
in a fifth, joiners, turners,
tailors and shoe-makers; in
a sixth, manufacturers of silk,
brocade and fine muslins ...

The artisans come every
morning to their karkhanas
where they remain
employed the whole day;
and in the evening return to
their homes. In this quiet
regular manner, their time
glides away; no one aspiring
for any improvement in the
condition of life wherein he
happens to be born.

| > How does Bernier |

| convey a sense that |
although there was a

| great deal of activity, |
there was little progress?

1a

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

In fact, during the seventeenth century about
15 per cent of the population lived in towns. This
was, on average, higher than the proportion of urban
population in Western Europe in the same period.
In spite of this Bernier described Mughal cities as
“camp towns”, by which he meant towns that owed
their existence, and depended for their survival,
on the imperial camp. He believed that these came
into existence when the imperial court moved in
and rapidly declined when it moved out. He
suggested that they did not have viable social and
economic foundations but were dependent on
imperial patronage.

As in the case of the question of landownership,
Bernier was drawing an oversimplified picture.
There were all kinds of towns: manufacturing
towns, trading towns, port-towns, sacred centres,
pilgrimage towns, etc. Their existence is an index
of the prosperity of merchant communities and
professional classes.

Merchants often had strong community or kin ties,
and were organised into their own caste-cum-
occupational bodies. In western India these groups
were called mahajans, and their chief, the sheth. In
urban centres such as Ahmedabad the mahajans
were collectively represented by the chief of the
merchant community who was called the nagarsheth.

Other urban groups included professional
classes such as physicians (hakim or vaid), teachers
(pundit or mulla), lawyers (wakil), painters,
architects, musicians, calligraphers, etc. While
some depended on imperial patronage, many made
their living by serving other patrons, while still
others served ordinary people in crowded markets
or bazaars.

> Discuss...

Why do you think scholars like Bernier chose to
compare India with Europe?

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

7. WOMEN

SLAVES, SATI AND LABOURERS

Travellers who left written accounts were
generally men who were interested in and
sometimes intrigued by the condition of
women in the subcontinent. Sometimes they
took social inequities for granted as a
“natural” state of affairs. For instance,
slaves were openly sold in markets, like any
other commodity, and were regularly
exchanged as gifts. When Ibn Battuta
reached Sind he purchased “horses, camels
and slaves” as gifts for Sultan Muhammad
bin Tughlaq. When he reached Multan, he
presented the governor with, “a slave and
horse together with raisins and almonds”.
Muhammad bin Tughlaq, informs Ibn
Battuta, was so happy with the sermon of a
preacher named Nasiruddin that he gave him
“a hundred thousand tankas (coins) and
two hundred slaves”.

It appears from Ibn Battuta’s account that
there was considerable differentiation among
slaves. Some female slaves in the service of
the Sultan were experts in music and dance,
and Ibn Battuta enjoyed their performance
at the wedding of the Sultan’s sister. Female
slaves were also employed by the Sultan to
keep a watch on his nobles.

Slaves were generally used for domestic
labour, and Ibn Battuta found their services
particularly indispensable for carrying
women and men on palanquins or dola. The
price of slaves, particularly female slaves
required for domestic labour, was very low,
and most families who could afford to do so
kept at least one or two of them.

Contemporary European travellers and
writers often highlighted the treatment of
women as a crucial marker of difference
between Western and Eastern societies. Not
surprisingly, Bernier chose the practice of
sati for detailed description. He noted that
while some women seemed to embrace death
cheerfully, others were forced to die.

Rationalised 2023-24

135

Source 15

Slave women

Ibn Battuta informs us:

It is the habit of the emperor ... to
keep with every noble, great or
small, one of his slaves who spies
on the nobles. He also appoints
female scavengers who enter the
houses unannounced; and to them
the slave girls communicate all the
information they possess.

Most female slaves were captured in
raids and expeditions.

Source 16

The child sati

This is perhaps one of the most
poignant descriptions by Bernier:

At Lahore I saw a most beautiful
young widow sacrificed, who
could not, I think, have been more
than twelve years ofage. The poor
little creature appeared more dead
than alive when she approached
the dreadful pit: the agony of her
mind cannot be described; she
trembled and wept bitterly; but
three or four of the Brahmanas,
assisted by an old woman who held
her under the arm, forced the
unwilling victim toward the fatal
spot, seated her on the wood, tied
her hands and feet, lest she should
run away, and in that situation the
innocent creature was burnt alive.
I found it difficult to repress my
feelings and to prevent their
bursting forth into clamorous and
unavailing rage ...

136

=> Discuss...

Why do you think the lives of
ordinary women workers did
not attract the attention of
travellers such as Ibn Battuta
and Bernier?

Fig. 5.13
A sculpted panel from Mathura
depicting travellers

| > What are the various modes
of transport that are shown?
Le _ |

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

However, women’s lives revolved around much else
besides the practice of sati. Their labour was crucial
in both agricultural and non-agricultural production.
Women from merchant families participated in
commercial activities, sometimes even taking
mercantile disputes to the court of law. It therefore
seems unlikely that women were confined to the
private spaces of their homes.

You may have noticed that travellers’ accounts
provide us with a tantalising glimpse of the lives of
men and women during these centuries, However,
their observations were often shaped by the:contexts
from which they came. At the same time, there were
many aspects of social life that these\travellers did
not notice.

Also relatively unknown, are the experiences and
observations, of men (and possibly women) from the
subcontinent who crossed seas and mountains and
ventured into lands beyond the subcontinent. What
did they see and hear?.How were their relations with
peoples-of distant lands shaped? What were the
languages they used? These and other questions will
hopefully be systematically addressed by historians
in the years to come.

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

137

f

TIMELINE

SOME TRAVELLERS WHO LEFT ACCOUNTS

Tenth-eleventh centuries

973-1048

Muhammad ibn Ahmad Abu Raihan al-Biruni
(from Uzbekistan)

Thirteenth century

1254-1323

Marco Polo (from Italy)

Fourteenth century

1304-77

Ibn Battuta (from Morocco)

Fifteenth century
1413-82

Abd al-Razzaq Kamal al-Din ibn Ishaq al-Samarqandi
(from Samarqand)

1466-72
(years spent in India)

Afanasii Nikitich Nikitin
(fifteenth century, from Russia)

Sixteenth century

1518
(visit to India)

Duarte Barbosa, d.1521 (from Portugal)

1562 Seydi Ali Reis (from Turkey)
(year of death)
1536-1600 Antonio Monserrate (from Spain)

Seventeenth century

1626-31
(years spent in India)

Mahmud Wali Balkhi (from Balkh)

1600-67 Peter Mundy (from England)
1605-89 Jean-Baptiste Tavernier (from France)
1620-88 Francois Bernier (from France)

Note: Unless otherwise indicated, the dates mentioned are those of the lifespan of the traveller.

y,

Rationalised 2023-24
138

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

ANSWER IN 100-150 WORDS

Write a note on the Kitab-ul-Hind.

Compare and contrast the perspectives from which Ibn
Battuta and Bernier wrote their accounts of their travels
in India.

Discuss the picture of urban centres that emerges from
Bernier’s account.

Analyse the evidence for slavery provided by Ibn Battuta.

What were the elements of the practice of sati that drew
the attention of Bernier?

WRITE A SHORT ESSAY (ABOUT
250-300 WORDS) ONTHE FOLLOWING:

Discuss Al-Biruni’s understanding of the caste system.

Do you think Ibn Battuta’s account is useful in
arriving at an understanding of life in contemporary
urban centres? Give reasons for your answer.

Discuss the extent to which Bernier’s account enables
historians to reconstruct contemporary rural society.

Read this excerpt from Bernier:

Numerous are the instances of handsome pieces
of workmanship made by persons destitute of
tools, and who can scarcely be said to have received
instruction from a master. Sometimes they imitate
so perfectly articles of European manufacture that
the difference between the original and copy can
hardly be discerned. Among other things, the
Indians make excellent muskets, and fowling-
pieces, and such beautiful gold ornaments that
it may be doubted if the exquisite workmanship
of those articles can be exceeded by any European
goldsmith. I have often admired the beauty,
softness, and delicacy of their paintings.

List the crafts mentioned in the passage. Compare
these with the descriptions of artisanal activity in
the chapter.

Rationalised 2023-24
THROUGH THE EYES oF TRAVELLERS

MAP WORK

10. Onan outline map of the world mark the countries
visited by Ibn Battuta. What are the seas that he
may have crossed?

PROJECTS (CHOOSE ONE)

11. Interview any one of your older relatives (mother/
father/grandparents/uncles/aunts) who has
travelled outside your town or village. Find out
(a) where they went, (b) how they travelled,
(c) how long did it take, (d) why did they travel
(e) and did they face any difficulties. List as many
similarities and differences that they may have
noticed between their place of residence and the
place they visited, focusing on language, clothes,
food, customs, buildings, roads, the lives of men
and women. Write a report on your findings.

12. For any one of the travellers mentioned in
the chapter, find out more about his life and
writings. Prepare a report on his travels, noting
in particular how he described society, and
comparing these descriptions with the excerpts
included in the chapter.

Fig. 5.14
A painting depicting travellers at rest

Rationalised 2023-24

139

If you would like to know
more, read:

Muzaffar Alam and
Sanjay Subrahmanyam. 20006.
Indo-Persian Travels in the Age
of Discoveries, 1400-1800.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Catherine Asher and Cynthia
Talbot. 2006.

India Before Europe.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Francois Bernier. nd.
Travels in the Mogul Empire
AD 1656-1668.

Low Price Publications,
New Delhi.

H.A.R. Gibb (ed.). 1993.
The Travels of Ibn Battuta.
Munshiram Manoharlal, Delhi.

Mushirul Hasan (ed.). 2005.
Westward Bound:

Travels of Mirza Abu Talib.
Oxford University Press,
New Delhi.

H.K. Kaul (ed.). 1997.
Travellers’ India —- an Anthology.
Oxford University Press,

New Delhi.

Jean-Baptiste Tavernier. 1993.
Travels in India.
Munshiram Manoharlal, Delhi.

LY,

NG

For more information, ~ ©
you could visit:

www.edumaritime.org
12094CHO6

BHAKTI- SUFI TRADITIONS

THEME CHANGES IN RELIGIOUS BELIEFS AND
SIX DEVOTIONAL TEXTS

(C. EIGHTH TO EIGHTEENTH CENTURY)

We saw in Chapter 4 that by the mid-first
millennium ce the landscape of the subcontinent
was dotted with a variety of religious structures —
stupas, monasteries, temples. If these typified
certain religious beliefs and practices, others have
been reconstructed from textual traditions,
including the Puranas, many of which received
their present shape around the same time, and yet
others remain only faintly visible in textual and
visual records.

New textual sources available from this period
include compositions attributed to poet-saints,
most of whom expressed themselves orally in
regional languages used by ordinary people. These
compositions, which were often set to music, were
compiled by disciples or devotees, generally after
the death of the poet-saint. What is more, these
traditions were fluid — generations of devotees tended
to elaborate on the original message, and occasionally
modified or even abandoned some of the ideas that
appeared problematic or irrelevant in different
political, social or cultural contexts. Using these
sources thus poses a challenge to historians.

Historians also draw on hagiographies or
biographies of saints written by their followers (or
members of their religious sect). These may not be
literally accurate, but allow a glimpse into the ways
in which devotees perceived the lives of these path-
breaking women and men.

As we will see, these sources provide us with
insights into a scenario characterised by dynamism
and diversity. Let us look at some elements of these
more closely.

Fig. 6.1

A twelfth-century bronze sculpture of
Manikkavachakar, a devotee of Shiva

who composed beautiful devotional songs in Tamil

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

1. A MOSAIC OF RELIGIOUS BELIEFS

AND PRACTICES

Perhaps the most striking feature of this phase is
the increasing visibility of a wide range of gods and
goddesses in sculpture as well as in texts. At one
level, this indicates the continued and even extended
worship of the major deities - Vishnu, Shiva and
the goddess - each of whom was visualised in a
variety of forms.

1.1 The integration of cults

Historians who have tried to understand these
developments suggest that there were at least two
processes at work. One was a process of disseminating
Brahmanical ideas. This is exemplified by the
composition, compilation and preservation of Puranic
texts in simple Sanskrit verse, explicitly meant to
be accessible to women and Shudras, who were
generally excluded from Vedic learning. At the same
time, there was a second process at work - that of
the Brahmanas accepting and reworking the beliefs
and practices of these and other social categories. In
fact, many beliefs and practices were shaped through
a continuous dialogue between what sociologists have
described as “great” Sanskritic Puranic traditions
and “little” traditions throughout the land.

One of the most striking examples of this process
is evident at Puri, Orissa, where the principal deity
was identified, by the twelfth century, as Jagannatha
(literally, the lord of the world), a form of Vishnu.

141

“Great” and “little”

traditions

The terms great and little
traditions were coined by a
sociologist named Robert
Redfield in the twentieth
century to describe the cultural
practices of peasant societies.
He found that peasants
observed rituals and customs
that emanated from dominant
social categories, including
priests and rulers. These he
classified as part of a great
tradition. At the same time,
peasants also followed local
practices that did not
necessarily correspond with
those of the great tradition.
These he included within the
category of little tradition. He
also noticed that both great
and little traditions changed
over time, through a process of
interaction.

While scholars accept the
significance of these categories
and processes, they are
often uncomfortable with the
hierarchy suggested by the
terms great and little. The use
of quotation marks for “great”
and “little” is one way of
indicating this.

Fig. 6.2

Jagannatha (extreme right) with his
sister Subhadra (centre) and his
brother Balarama (left)

Rationalised 2023-24
142

Fig. 6.3

Sculpture of a Buddhist goddess,
Marichi (c. tenth century, Bihar),
an example of the process of
integration of different religious
beliefs and practices

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

If you compare Fig. 6.2 with Fig. 4.26 (Chapter 4)
you will notice that the deity is represented in a
very different way. In this instance, a local deity,
whose image was and continues to be made of wood
by local tribal specialists, was recognised as a form
of Vishnu. At the same time, Vishnu was visualised
in a way that was very different from that in other
parts of the country.

Such instances of integration are evident
amongst goddess cults as well. Worship of the
goddess, often simply in the form of a stone smeared
with ochre, was evidently widespread. These local
deities were often incorporated within the Puranic
framework by providing them with an identity as a
wife of the principal male deities - sometimes they
were equated with Lakshmi, the wife of Vishnu, in
other instances, with Parvati, the wife of Shiva.

1.2 Difference and conflict

Often associated with the goddess were forms
of worship that were classified as Tantric. Tantric
practices were widespread in several parts of the
subcontinent — they were open to women and
men, and practitioners often ignored differences
of caste and class within the ritual context. Many
of these ideas influenced Shaivism as well as
Buddhism, especially in the eastern, northern and
southern parts of the subcontinent.

All of these somewhat divergent and even disparate
beliefs and practices would come to be classified as
Hindu over the course of the next millennium. The
divergence is perhaps most stark if we compare Vedic
and Puranic traditions. The principal deities of the
Vedic pantheon, Agni, Indra and Soma, become
marginal figures, rarely visible in textual or visual
representations. And while we can catch a glimpse
of Vishnu, Shiva and the goddess in Vedic mantras,
these have little in common with the elaborate
Puranic mythologies. However, in spite of these
obvious discrepancies, the Vedas continued to be
revered as authoritative.

Not surprisingly, there were sometimes conflicts as
well — those who valued the Vedic tradition often
condemned practices that went beyond the closely
regulated contact with the divine through the
performance of sacrifices or precisely chanted mantras.
On the other hand those engaged in Tantric practices

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

frequently ignored the authority of the Vedas. Also,
devotees often tended to project their chosen deity,
either Vishnu or Shiva, as supreme. Relations with
other traditions, such as Buddhism or Jainism, were
also often fraught with tension if not open conflict.

The traditions of devotion or bhakti need to be
located within this context. Devotional worship had
a long history of almost a thousand years before
the period we are considering. During this time,
expressions of devotion ranged from the routine
worship of deities within temples to ecstatic
adoration where devotees attained a trance-like
state. The singing and chanting of devotional
compositions was often a part of such modes of
worship. This was particularly true of the Vaishnava
and Shaiva sects.

2. POEMS OF PRAYER

EARLY TRADITIONS OF BHAKTI
In the course of the evolution of these forms of
worship, in many instances, poet-saints emerged
as leaders around whom there developed a
community of devotees. Further, while Brahmanas
remained important intermediaries between gods and
devotees in several forms of bhakti, these traditions
also accommodated and acknowledged women and
the “lower castes”, categories considered ineligible
for liberation within the orthodox Brahmanical
framework. What also characterised traditions of
bhakti was a remarkable diversity.

At a different level, historians of religion often
classify bhakti traditions into two broad categories:
saguna (with attributes) and nirguna (without
attributes). The former included traditions that
focused on the worship of specific deities such
as Shiva, Vishnu and his avatars (incarnations) and
forms of the goddess or Devi, all often conceptualised
in anthropomorphic forms. Nirguna bhakti on the
other hand was worship of an abstract form of god.

2.1 The Alvars and Nayanars of Tamil Nadu
Some of the earliest bhakti movements (c. sixth
century) were led by the Alvars (literally, those who
are “immersed” in devotion to Vishnu) and Nayanars
(literally, leaders who were devotees of Shiva). They
travelled from place to place singing hymns in Tamil
in praise of their gods.

Rationalised 2023-24

143

> Discuss...

Find out about gods and
goddesses worshipped in your
town or village, noting their
names and the ways in which
they are depicted. Describe
the rituals that are
performed.
144

Source 1

The chaturvedin (Brahmana

versed in the four Vedas)
and the “outcaste”

This is an excerpt from a
composition of an Alvar named
Tondaradippodi, who was a
Brahmana:

You (Vishnu) manifestly like

those “servants” who express
their love for your feet,

though they may be born
outcastes, more than

the Chaturvedins who are
strangers and _ without
allegiance to your service.

| > Do you think
Tondaradippodi was
opposed to the caste
{ system?

Source 2

This is a verse composed by

Shastras or devotion?

Appar, a Nayanar saint:

O rogues who quote the law
books,

Of what use are your gotra and
kula?

Just bow to Marperu’s lord
(Shiva who resides in Marperu,
in Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu) as
your sole refuge.

r

> Are there any
similarities or differences

in the attitudes of
Tondaradippodi and Appar
towards Brahmanas?

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

During their travels the Alvars and Nayanars
identified certain shrines as abodes of their chosen
deities. Very often large temples were later built at
these sacred places. These developed as centres of
pilgrimage. Singing compositions of these poet-saints
became part of temple rituals in these shrines, as
did worship of the saints’ images.

2.2 Attitudes towards caste

Some historians suggest that the Alvars and
Nayanars initiated a movement of protest against
the caste system and the dominance of Brahmanas
or at least attempted to reform the system. To some
extent this is corroborated by the fact that bhaktas
hailed from diverse social backgrounds ranging from
Brahmanas to artisans and cultivators and even
from castes considered “untouchable”.

The importance of the traditions of the Alvars
and Nayanars was sometimes indicated by the
claim that their compositions were as important
as the Vedas. For instance, one of the major
anthologies of compositions by the Alvars, the Nalayira
Divyaprabandham, was frequently described as the
Tamil Veda, thus claiming that the text was as
significant as the four Vedas in Sanskrit that were
cherished by the Brahmanas.

2.3 Women devotees

Perhaps one of the most striking features of these
traditions was the presence of women. For instance,
the compositions of Andal, a woman Alvar, were
widely sung (and continue to be sung to date). Andal
saw herself as the beloved of Vishnu; her verses
express her love for the deity. Another woman,
Karaikkal Ammaiyar, a devotee of Shiva, adopted
the path of extreme asceticism in order to attain

Compilations of devotional literature

By the tenth century the compositions of the 12 Alvars were
compiled in an anthology known as the Nalayira
Divyaprabandham (“Four Thousand Sacred Compositions”).

The poems of Appar, Sambandar and Sundarar form
the Tevaram, a collection that was compiled and classified
in the tenth century on the basis of the music of the songs.

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS 145

her goal. Her compositions were preserved within
the Nayanar tradition. These women renounced their
social obligations, but did not join an alternative
order or become nuns. Their very existence and their
compositions posed a challenge to patriarchal norms.

Source 3

This is an excerpt from a poem by Karaikkal Ammaityar in
which she describes herself:

The female Pey (demoness)

with... bulging veins,

protruding eyes, white teeth and shrunken stomach,
red haired and jutting teeth

lengthy shins extending till the ankles,

shouts and wails

while wandering in the forest.

This is the forest of Alankatu,

which is the home of our father (Shiva)

who dances ... with his matted hair

thrown in all eight directions, and with cool limbs.

r

> List the ways in which Karaikkal Ammaiyar
depicts herself as presenting a contrast to
| traditional notions of feminine beauty.

Fig. 6.4
A twelfth-century bronze image
of Karaikkal Ammaiyar

2.4 Relations with the state
We saw in Chapter 2 that there were several
important chiefdoms in the Tamil region in the early
first millennium ce. From the second half of the first
millennium there is evidence for states, including
those of the Pallavas and Pandyas (e. sixth to ninth
centuries ce). While Buddhism and Jainism had
been prevalent in this region for several centuries,
drawing support from merchant and artisan
communities, these religious traditions received
occasional royal patronage.

Interestingly, one of the major themes in Tamil
bhakti hymns is the poets’ opposition to Buddhism
and Jainism. This is particularly marked in the

Rationalised 2023-24
146

Fig. 6.5
An image of Shiva as Nataraja

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

compositions of the Nayanars. Historians have
attempted to explain this hostility by suggesting that
it was due to competition between members of
other religious traditions for royal patronage. What
is evident is that the powerful Chola rulers (ninth
to thirteenth centuries) supported Brahmanical
and bhakti traditions, making land grants and
constructing temples for Vishnu and Shiva.

In fact, some of the most magnificent Shiva
temples, including those at Chidambaram, Thanjavur
and Gangaikondacholapuram, were constructed
under the patronage of Chola rulers. This was also
the period when some of the most spectacular
representations of Shiva in bronze sculpture were
produced. Clearly, the visions of the Nayanars
inspired artists.

Both Nayanars and Alvars were revered by the
Vellala peasants. Not surprisingly, rulers tried to
win their support as well. The Chola kings, for
instance, often attempted to claim divine support
and proclaim their own power and status by building
splendid temples that were adorned
with stone and metal sculpture to
recreate the visions of these popular
saints who sang in the language of
the people.

These kings also introduced the
singing of Tamil Shaiva hymns in
the temples under royal patronage,
taking the initiative to collect and
organise them into a text (Tevaram).
Further, inscriptional evidence from
around 945 suggests that the Chola
ruler Parantaka I had consecrated
metal images of Appar, Sambandar
and Sundarar in a Shiva temple.
These were carried in processions
during the festivals of these saints.

> Discuss...

Why do you think kings were
interested in proclaiming their
connections with bhaktas?

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

3. THE VIRASHAIVA TRADITION

IN KARNATAKA

The twelfth century witnessed the emergence of a
new movement in Karnataka, led by a Brahmana
named Basavanna (1106-68) who was a minister in
the court of a Kalachuri ruler. His followers were
known as Virashaivas (heroes of Shiva) or Lingayats
(wearers of the linga).

Lingayats continue to be an important community
in the region to date. They worship Shiva in his
manifestation as a linga, and men usually wear a
small linga in a silver case on a loop strung over the
left shoulder. Those who are revered include the
jJangama or wandering monks. Lingayats believe
that on death the devotee will be united with Shiva
and will not return to this world. Therefore they do
not practise funerary rites such as cremation,
prescribed in the Dharmashastras. Instead, they
ceremonially bury their dead.

The Lingayats challenged the idea of caste and
the “pollution” attributed to certain groups by
Brahmanas. They also questioned the theory of
rebirth. These won them followers amongst those
who were marginalised within the Brahmanical
social order. The Lingayats also encouraged certain
practices disapproved in the Dharmashastras,
such as post-puberty marriage and the remarriage
of widows. Our understanding of the Virashaiva
tradition is derived from vachanas (literally, sayings)
composed in Kannada by women and men who
joined the movement.

New religious developments

This period also witnessed two major developments.
On the one hand, many ideas of the Tamil bhaktas
(especially the Vaishnavas) were incorporated within
the Sanskritic tradition, culminating in the composition
of one of the best-known Puranas, the Bhagavata
Purana. Second, we find the development of traditions
of bhakti in Maharashtra in the thirteenth century.

Rationalised 2023-24

147

Source 4

Rituals and the
real world

Here is a vachana composed
by Basavanna:

When they see a serpent
carved in stone they pour
milk on it.

Ifa real serpent comes they
say: “Kill. Kill.”

To the servant of the god who
could eat if served they say:
“Go away! Go away!”

But to the image of the god
which cannot eat they offer
dishes of food.

| > Describe Basavanna’s

| attitude towards rituals. l
How does he attempt to

convince the listener?

148

Fig. 6.6

Fragment of a page from the
Qur’an, belonging to a
manuscript dating to the
eighth or ninth century

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

4. RELIGIOUS FERMENT IN

NORTH INDIA

During the same period, in north India deities such as
Vishnu and Shiva were worshipped in temples, often built
with the support of rulers. However, historians have not
found evidence of anything resembling the compositions
of the Alvars and Nayanars till the fourteenth century.
How do we account for this difference?

Some historians point out that in north India this
was the period when several Rajput states emerged. In
most of these states Brahmanas occupied positions of
importance, performing a range of secular and ritual
functions. There seems to have been little or no attempt
to challenge their position directly.

At the same time other
religious leaders, who did not
function within the orthodox
Brahmanical framework, were
gaining ground. These included
the Naths, Jogis and Siddhas.
Many of them came from
artisanal groups, including
weavers, who were becoming
increasingly important with the
development of organised craft
production. Demand for such
production grew with the
emergence of new urban centres,
and long-distance trade with
Central Asia and West Asia.

Many of these new religious
leaders questioned’ the
authority of the Vedas, and
expressed themselves in languages spoken by ordinary
people, which developed over centuries into the ones
used today. However, in spite of their popularity these
religious leaders were not in a position to win the
support of the ruling elites.

A new element in this situation was the coming of
the Turks which culminated in the establishment of the
Delhi Sultanate (thirteenth century). This undermined
the power of many of the Rajput states and the
Brahmanas who were associated with these kingdoms.
This was accompanied by marked changes in the realm
of culture and religion. The coming of the sufis
(Section 6) was a significant part of these developments.

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS 149

5. NEW STRANDS IN THE FABRIC

ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

Just as the regions within the subcontinent were
not isolated from one another, so too, contact with
lands beyond the seas and mountains had existed
for millennia. Arab merchants, for instance,
frequented ports along the western coast in the first
millennium ce, while Central Asian people settled
in the north-western parts of the subcontinent
during the same period. From the seventh century,
with the advent of Islam, these regions became part
of what is often termed the Islamic world.

5.1 Faiths of rulers and subjects

One axis of understanding the significance of these
connections that is frequently adopted is to focus on
the religions of ruling elites. In 711 an Arab general
named Muhammad Qasim conquered Sind, which
became part of the Caliph’s domain. Later (c. thirteenth

Ulama (plural of alim, or one
who knows) are scholars of
Islamic studies. As preservers of
this tradition they perform
various religious, juridical and

century) the Turks and Afghans established the
Delhi Sultanate. This was followed by the formation
of Sultanates in the Deccan and other parts of the
subcontinent; Islam was an acknowledged religion of
rulers in several areas. This continued with the
establishment of the Mughal Empire in the sixteenth
century as well as in many of the regional states that
emerged in the eighteenth century.

Theoretically, Muslim rulers were to be guided by
the ulama, who were expected to ensure that they
ruled according to the shari‘a. Clearly, the situation
was complicated in the subcontinent, where there
were populations that did not subscribe to Islam.

It is in this context that the category of the zimmi,
meaning protected (derived from the Arabic word
zimma, protection) developed for people who followed
revealed scriptures, such as the Jews and Christians,
and lived under Muslim rulership. They paid a tax
called jizya and gained the right to be protected by
Muslims. In India this status was extended to Hindus
as well. As you will see (Chapter 9), rulers such as
the Mughals came to regard themselves as emperors
of not just Muslims but of all peoples.

In effect, rulers often adopted a fairly flexible policy
towards their subjects. For instance, several rulers
gave land endowments and granted tax exemptions
to Hindu, Jaina, Zoroastrian, Christian and Jewish
religious institutions and also expressed respect and

Rationalised 2023-24

teaching functions.

Shari‘a

The sharia is the law governing
the Muslim community. It is
based on the Qur’an and the
hadis, traditions of the Prophet
including a record of his
remembered words and deeds.

With the expansion of Islamic
rule outside Arabia, in areas
where customs and traditions
were different, giyas (reasoning
by analogy) and ijma
(consensus of the community)
were recognised as two other
sources of legislation. Thus, the
shari‘a evolved from the
Qur’an, hadis, giyas and ijma.

150 THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

devotion towards non-Muslim religious leaders.
These grants were made by several Mughal rulers,
including Akbar and Aurangzeb.

Source 5

A church in Khambat

Fig. 6.7 This is an excerpt from a farman (imperial order) issued
A Mughal painting depicting by Akbar in 1598:

Emperor Jahangir with a Jogi Whereas it reached our eminent and holy notice that
Dae the padris (fathers) of the Holy Society of Jesus wish

to build a house of prayer (church) in the city of
Kambayat (Khambat, in Gujarat); therefore an exalted

SSP
Poe al

mandate ... is being issued, ... that the dignitaries of
the city of Kambayat should in no case stand in their
way but should allow them to build a church so that
they may engage themselves in their own worship. It
is necessary that the order of the Emperor should be
nay’ in every way.

"> Who were the people from whom Akbar
anticipated opposition to his order?

Source 6

Reverence for the Jogi

Here is an excerpt from a letter written by Aurangzeb to
a Jogi in 1661-62:
The possessor of the sublime station, Shiv Murat, Guru
Anand Nath Jio!

May your Reverence remain in peace and happiness
ever under the protection of Sri Shiv Jio!

.. A piece of cloth for the cloak and a sum of twenty
five rupees which have been sent as an offering will
reach (Your Reverence) ... Your Reverence may write
to us whenever there is any service which can be
rendered by us.

Ee Identify the deity worshipped by the Jogi.
Describe the attitude of the emperor towards
7 the Jogi.

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

5.2 The popular practice of Islam
The developments that followed the coming of Islam
were not confined to ruling elites; in fact they
permeated far and wide, through the subcontinent,
amongst different social strata - peasants, artisans,
warriors, merchants, to name a few. All those who
adopted Islam accepted, in principle, the five “pillars”
of the faith: that there is one God, Allah, and Prophet
Muhammad is his messenger (shahada); offering
prayers five times a day (namaz/salat); giving alms
(zakat); fasting during the month of Ramzan (sawm);
and performing the pilgrimage to Mecca (hajj).

However, these universal features were often
overlaid with diversities in practice derived from
sectarian affiliations (Sunni, Shi‘a), and the influence
of local customary practices of converts from different
social milieus. For example, the Khojahs, a branch
of the Ismailis (a Shi‘a sect), developed new modes
of communication, disseminating ideas derived from
the Qur’an through indigenous literary genres. These
included the ginan (derived from the Sanskrit jnana,
meaning “knowledge”), devotional poems in Punjabi,
Multani, Sindhi, Kachchi, Hindi and Gujarati, sung
in special ragas during daily prayer meetings.

Elsewhere, Arab Muslim traders who settled
along the Malabar coast (Kerala) adopted the
local language, Malayalam. They also adopted
local customs such as matriliny (Chapter 3) and
matrilocal residence.

The complex blend of a universal faith with local
traditions is perhaps best exemplified in the
architecture of mosques. Some architectural features

Rationalised 2023-24

151

Fig. 6.8

A Khojaki manuscript

The ginan were transmitted

orally before being recorded in the
Khojaki script that was derived
from the local landa (“clipped”
mercantile script) used by the
linguistically diverse community
of Khojahs in the Punjab, Sind
and Gujarat.

Matrilocal residence is a
practice where women after
marriage remain in their natal
home with their children and
the husbands may come to stay
with them.

Fig. 6.9

A mosque in Kerala,

c. thirteenth century

Note the shikhara-like roof.
152

Fig. 6.10

Atiya mosque, Mymensingh district,

Bangladesh, built with brick, 1609

Fig. 6.11

The Shah Hamadan mosque in
Srinagar, on the banks of the
Jhelum, is often regarded as the
“jewel in the crown” of all the
existing mosques of Kashmir.
Built in 1395, it is one of the best
examples of Kashmiri wooden
architecture. Notice the spire and
the beautifully carved eaves. It is
decorated with papier mache.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

of mosques are universal —- such as
their orientation towards Mecca,
evident in the placement of the mihrab
(prayer niche) and the minbar (pulpit).
However, there are several features
that show variations - such as roofs
and building materials (see Figs. 6.9,
6.10 and 6.11).

5.3 Names for communities
We often take the terms Hindu and
Muslim for granted, as labels for
religious communities. Yet, these
terms did not gain currency for a very
long time. Historians who have studied
Sanskrit texts and inscriptions dating
between the eighth and fourteenth
centuries point out that the term
musalman or Muslim was virtually
never used. Instead, people were
occasionally identified in terms of
the region from which they came.
So, the Turkish rulers were designated
as Turushka, Tajika were people from
Tajikistan and Parashika were people
from Persia. Sometimes, terms used
‘, for other peoples were applied to the
new migrants. For instance, the
Turks and Afghans were referred to
} as Shakas (Chapters 2 and 3) and
Yavanas (a term used for Greeks).
Amore general term for these migrant
communities was mlechchha, indicating that they did
not observe the norms of caste society and spoke
languages that were not derived from Sanskrit. Such
terms sometimes had a derogatory connotation, but they
rarely denoted a distinct religious community of Muslims
in opposition to Hindus. And as we saw (Chapter 5),
the term “Hindu” was used in a variety of ways, not
necessarily restricted to a religious connotation.

> Discuss...

Find out more about the architecture of mosques in
your village or town. What are the materials used to
build mosques? Are these locally available?

Are there any distinctive architectural features?

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

6. THE GROWTH OF SUFISM

In the early centuries of Islam a group of religious-
minded people called sufis turned to asceticism and
mysticism in protest against the growing materialism
of the Caliphate as a religious and political institution.
They were critical of the dogmatic definitions and
scholastic methods of interpreting the Qur'an and sunna
(traditions of the Prophet) adopted by theologians.
Instead, they laid emphasis on seeking salvation
through intense devotion and love for God by following
His commands, and by following the example of the
Prophet Muhammad whom they regarded as a perfect
human being. The sufis thus sought an interpretation
of the Qur’an on the basis of their personal experience.

6.1 Khangqahs and silsilas

By the eleventh century Sufism evolved into a well-
developed movement with a body of literature on
Quranic studies and sufi practices. Institutionally,
the sufis began to organise communities around the
hospice or khangah (Persian) controlled by a teaching
master known as shailh (in Arabic), pir or murshid (in
Persian). He enrolled disciples (murids) and appointed
a successor (khalifa). He established rules for spiritual
conduct and interaction between inmates as well as
between laypersons and the master.

Sufi silsilas began to crystallise in different parts of
the Islamic world around the twelfth century. The word
silsila literally means a chain, signifying a continuous
link between master and disciple, stretching as an
unbroken spiritual genealogy to the Prophet Muhammad.
It was through this channel that spiritual power and
blessings were transmitted to devotees. Special rituals
of initiation were developed in which initiates took an
oath of allegiance, wore a patched garment, and shaved
their hair.

When the shaikh died, his tomb-shrine (dargah, a
Persian term meaning court) became the centre of
devotion for his followers. This encouraged the practice
of pilgrimage or ziyarat to his grave, particularly on
his death anniversary or urs (or marriage, signifying
the union of his soul with God). This was because
people believed that in death saints were united with
God, and were thus closer to Him than when living.
People sought their blessings to attain material and
spiritual benefits. Thus evolved the cult of the shaikh
revered as wali.

Rationalised 2023-24

153

Sufism and tasawwuf

Sufism is an English word
coined in the nineteenth
century. The word used for
Sufism in Islamic texts is
tasawwuf. Historians have
understood this term in
several ways. According to
some scholars, it is derived
from suf, meaning wool,
referring to the coarse
woollen clothes worn by
sufis. Others derive it from
safa, meaning purity. It may
also have been derived from
suffa, the platform outside
the Prophet's mosque,
where a group of close
followers assembled to learn
about the faith.

Names of silsilas

Most sufi lineages were
named after a founding
figure. For example, the
Qadiri order was named
after Shaikh Abd’ul Qadir
Jilani. However, some like
the Chishti order, were
named after their place
of origin, in this case the
town of Chisht in central
Afghanistan.
154

Wali (plural autliya) or friend of
God was a sufi who claimed
proximity to Allah, acquiring
His Grace (barakat) to perform
miracles (karamatg.

> Discuss...

Are there any khangahs or
dargahs in your town or
village? Find out when these
were built, and what are the
activities associated with
them. Are there other places
where religious men and
women meet or live?

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

6.2 Outside the khanqah

Some mystics initiated movements based on a
radical interpretation of sufi ideals. Many scorned
the khanqgah and took to mendicancy and observed
celibacy. They ignored rituals and observed extreme
forms of asceticism. They were known by different
names — Qalandars, Madaris, Malangs, Haidaris,
etc. Because of their deliberate defiance of the shari‘a
they were often referred to as be-shari‘a, in contrast
to the ba-shari‘a sufis who complied with it.

7. THE CHISHTIS IN THE

SUBCONTINENT
Of the groups of sufis who migrated to India in
the late twelfth century, the Chishtis were the
most influential. This was because they adapted
successfully to the local environment and adopted
several features of Indian devotional traditions.

7.1 Life in the Chishti khangah

The khangah was the centre of social life. We know
about Shaikh Nizamuddin’s hospice (c. fourteenth
century) on the banks of the river Yamuna in
Ghiyaspur, on the outskirts of what was then the
city of Delhi. It comprised several small rooms and
a big hall (jama’at khana) where the inmates and
visitors lived and prayed. The inmates included family
members of the Shaikh, his attendants and disciples.
The Shaikh lived in a small room on the roof of the
hall where he met visitors in the morning and evening.
A veranda surrounded the courtyard, and a boundary
wall ran around the complex. On one occasion, fearing
a Mongol invasion, people from the neighbouring areas
flocked into the khanqah to seek refuge.

MAJOR TEACHERS OF THE CHISHTI SILSILA

SUFI TEACHERS YEAR OF DEATH LOCATION OF DARGAH
Shaikh Muinuddin Sijzi 1235 Ajmer (Rajasthan)
Khwaja Qutbuddin Bakhtiyar Kaki 1235 Delhi

Shaikh Fariduddin Ganj-i Shakar 1265 Ajodhan (Pakistan)
Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya 1325 Delhi

Shaikh Nasiruddin Chiragh-i Dehli 1356 Delhi

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

There was an open kitchen (langar), run on futuh
(unasked-for charity). From morning till late night
people from all walks of life - soldiers, slaves,
singers, merchants, poets, travellers, rich and
poor, Hindu jogis (yogi) and galandars - came
seeking discipleship, amulets for healing, and the
intercession of the Shaikh in various matters. Other
visitors included poets such as Amir Hasan Sijzi
and Amir Khusrau and the court historian Ziyauddin
Barani, all of whom wrote about the Shaikh.
Practices that were adopted, including bowing before
the Shaikh, offering water to visitors, shaving the
heads of initiates, and yogic exercises, represented
attempts to assimilate local traditions.

Shaikh Nizamuddin appointed several spiritual
successors and deputed them to set up hospices in
various parts of the subcontinent. As a result the
teachings, practices and organisation of the Chishtis
as well as the fame of the Shaikh spread rapidly.
This in turn drew pilgrims to his shrine, and also to
the shrines of his spiritual ancestors.

7.2 Chishti devotionalism: ziyarat and qawwali
Pilgrimage, called ziyarat, to tombs of sufi saints is
prevalent all over the Muslim world. This practice
is an occasion for seeking the sufi’s spiritual grace
(barakat). For more than seven centuries people of
various creeds, classes and social backgrounds have
expressed their devotion at the dargahs of the five
great Chishti saints (see chart on p.154). Amongst
these, the most revered shrine is that of Khwaja
Muinuddin, popularly known as “Gharib Nawaz”
(comforter of the poor).

The earliest textual references to Khwaja
Muinuddin’s dargah date to the fourteenth century.
It was evidently popular because of the austerity
and piety of its Shaikh, the greatness of his spiritual
successors, and the patronage of royal visitors.
Muhammad bin Tughlag (ruled, 1324-51) was the

Fig. 6.12

A seventeenth-century painting of
Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya and
his disciple Amir Khusrau

Cl TTT TTT TTT TTT TTT a
> Describe how the artist differentiates between the

| Shaikh and his disciple. |

Rationalised 2023-24

155

The story of

Data Ganj Bakhsh

In 1039 Abu’l Hasan al Hujwini,
a native of Hujwir near Ghazni
in Afghanistan, was forced to
cross the Indus as a captive of
the invading Turkish army. He
settled in Lahore and wrote a
book in Persian called the Kashf
ul-Mahjub (Unveiling of the
Veiled) to explain the meaning
of tasawwuf, and those who
practised it, that is, the sufi.

Hujwiri died in 1073 and was
buried in Lahore. The grandson
of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni
constructed a tomb over his
grave, and this tomb-shrine
became a site of pilgrimage for
his devotees, especially on his
death anniversary.

Even today Hujwiri is revered
as Data Ganj Bakhsh or “Giver
who bestows treasures” and his

mausoleum is called Data
Darbar or “Court of the Giver”.

156 THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

first Sultan to visit the shrine, but the earliest
construction to house the tomb was funded in the
late fifteenth century by Sultan Ghiyasuddin Khalji
of Malwa. Since the shrine was located on the trade
route linking Delhi and Gujarat, it attracted a lot
of travellers.

By the sixteenth century the shrine had become
very popular; in fact it was the spirited singing of
pilgrims bound for Ajmer that inspired Akbar
to visit the tomb. He went there fourteen times,
sometimes two or three times a year, to seek
blessings for new conquests, fulfilment of vows, and
the birth of sons. He maintained this tradition until
1580. Each of these visits was celebrated by
generous gifts, which were recorded in imperial
documents. For example, in 1568 he offered a huge
cauldron (degh) to facilitate cooking for pilgrims.
He also had a mosque constructed within the
compound of the dargah.

Fig. 6.13

Shaikhs greeting the Mughal
emperor Jahangir on his pilgrimage
to Ajmer, painting by an artist
named Manohar, c.1615

Cn. eT 7

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

Source 7

The pilgrimage of the Mughal princess

Jahanara, 1643

The following is an excerpt from Jahanara’s biography
of Shaikh Muinuddin Chishti, titled Munis al Arwah
(The Confidant of Spirits):

After praising the one God ... this lowly faqira
(humble soul) Jahanara ... went from the capital
Agra in the company of my great father (Emperor
Shah Jahan) towards the pure region of
incomparable Ajmer ... | was committed to this idea,
that every day in every station I would perform two
cycles of optional prayer ...

For several days ... | did not sleep on a leopard skin
at night, I did not extend my feet in the direction of the
blessed sanctuary of the revered saving master, and I
did not turn my back towards him. I passed the days
beneath the trees.

On Thursday, the fourth of the blessed month of
Ramzan, I attained the happiness of pilgrimage to the
illuminated and the perfumed tomb ... With an hour of
daylight remaining, I went to the holy sanctuary and yl
rubbed my pale face with the dust of that threshold.
From the doorway to the blessed tomb I went barefoot,
kissing the ground. Having entered the dome, I went
around the light-filled tomb of my master seven times
... Finally, with my own hand I put the finest quality of
itar on the perfumed tomb of the revered one, and
having taken off the rose scarf that [had on my head, I
placed it on the top of the blessed tomb ...

a, es 7
> What are the gestures that Jahanara

| records to indicate her devotion to the Shaikh? l
How does she suggest that the dargah was a
special place?

> Ss

Also part of ziyarat is the use of music and dance
including mystical chants performed by specially
trained musicians or qawwals to evoke divine
ecstasy. The sufis remember God either by reciting
the zikr (the Divine Names) or evoking His Presence
through sama’ (literally, “audition”) or performance
of mystical music. Sama‘ was integral to the Chishtis,
and exemplified interaction with indigenous
devotional traditions.

Rationalised 2023-24

157

The lamp of the

entire land

Each sufi shrine was associated
with distinctive features. This is
what an eighteenth-century
visitor from the Deccan, Dargah
Quli Khan, wrote about the
shrine of Nasiruddin Chiragh-i
Dehli in his Muraqqa-i Dehli
(Album of Delhi):

The Shaikh (in the grave)
is not the lamp of Delhi
but of the entire country.
People turn up there in
crowds, particularly on
Sunday. In the month
of Diwali the entire
population of Delhi visits
it and stays in tents
around the spring tank for
days. They take baths to
obtain cures from chronic
diseases. Muslims and
Hindus pay visits in the
same spirit. From morning
till evening people come
and also make themselves
busy in merrymaking in
the shade of the trees.
158

Am

ir Khusrau and
the qaul

Amir Khusrau (1253-1325), the
great poet, musician and disciple
of Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya,
gave a unique form to the Chishti
sama’ by introducing the qaul
(Arabic word meaning “saying”),
a hymn sung at the opening or
closing of qgawwali. This was
followed by sufi poetry in Persian,
Hindavi or Urdu, and sometimes
using words from all of these
languages. Qawwals (those who
sing these songs) at the shrine of
Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya always
start their recital with the gaul.
Today gawwali is performed in
shrines all over the subcontinent.

Fig. 6.14
Qawwali at the dargah of
Nizamuddin Auliya

> In what ways are the ideas
and modes of expression used
in this song similar to or
different from those used by
Jahanara to describe her
ziyarat (Source 7)?

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

7.3 Languages and communication

It was not just in sama‘ that the Chishtis adopted
local languages. In Delhi, those associated with
the Chishti silsila conversed in Hindavi, the language
of the people. Other sufis such as Baba Farid
composed verses in the local language, which were
incorporated in the Guru Granth Sahib. Yet others
composed long poems or masnavis to express ideas
of divine love using human love as an allegory. For
example, the prem-akhyan (love story) Padmavat
composed by Malik Muhammad Jayasi revolved
around the romance of Padmini and Ratansen, the
king of Chittor. Their trials were symbolic of the soul’s
journey to the divine. Such poetic compositions were
often recited in hospices, usually during sama‘.

A different genre of sufi poetry was composed in
and around the town of Bijapur, Karnataka. These
were short poems in Dakhani (a variant of Urdu)
attributed to Chishti sufis who lived in this region
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
These poems were probably sung by women while
performing household chores like grinding grain and
spinning. Other compositions were in the form of
lurinama or lullabies and shadinama or wedding
songs. It is likely that the sufis of this region were
inspired by the pre-existing bhakti tradition of the
Kannada vachanas of the Lingayats and the Marathi
abhangs of the sants of Pandharpur. It is through
this medium that Islam gradually gained a place in
the villages of the Deccan.

Source 8

Charkhanama

A song set to the rhythm of the spinning wheel:

As you take the cotton, you do zikr-i jali
As you separate the cotton you should do Zikr-i qalbi
And as you spool the thread you should do Zikr-i aini
Zikr should be uttered from the stomach through the
‘| chest,

| And threaded through the throat.

| The threads of breath should be counted one by one,

| ohsister.

| Up to twenty four thousand.

| Do this day and night,

| And offer this to your piras a gift.

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

7.4 Sufis and the state

A major feature of the Chishti tradition was austerity,
including maintaining a distance from worldly
power. However, this was by no means a situation of
absolute isolation from political power. The sufis
accepted unsolicited grants and donations from the
political elites. The Sultans in turn set up charitable
trusts (auqaf) as endowments for hospices and
granted tax-free land (inam).

The Chishtis accepted donations in cash and kind.
Rather than accumulate donations, they preferred
to use these fully on immediate requirements
such as food, clothes, living quarters and ritual
necessities (such as sama‘). All this enhanced the
moral authority of the shaikhs, which in turn
attracted people from all walks of life. Further, their
piety and scholarship, and people’s belief in their
miraculous powers made sufis popular among the
masses, whose support kings wished to secure.

Kings did not simply need to demonstrate their
association with sufis; they also required legitimation
from them. When the Turks set up the Delhi
Sultanate, they resisted the insistence of the ulama
on imposing shari‘a as state law because they
anticipated opposition from their subjects, the
majority of whom were non-Muslims. The Sultans
then sought out the sufis - who derived their
authority directly from God - and did not depend on
jurists to interpret the shari‘a.

Besides, it was believed that the auliya could
intercede with God in order to improve the material
and spiritual conditions of ordinary human beings.
This explains why kings often wanted their tombs to
be in the vicinity of sufi shrines and hospices.

However, there were instances of conflict between
the Sultans and the sufis. To assert their authority,
both expected that certain rituals be performed such
as prostration and kissing of the feet. Occasionally
the sufi shaikh was addressed with high-sounding
titles. For example, the disciples of Nizamuddin
Auliya addressed him as sultan-ul-mashaikh (literally,
Sultan amongst shailkhs).

Rationalised 2023-24

159

Sufis and the state

Other sufis such as the
Suhrawardi under the Delhi
Sultans and the Naqshbandi
under the Mughals were also
associated with the state.
However, the modes of their
association were not the same
as those of the Chishtis. In
some cases, sufis accepted
courtly offices.
160

> Discuss...

What are the potential
sources of conflict in the
relationship between religious
and political leaders?

> What aspects of the
relationship between the sufis
and the state do you think are
best illustrated in this account?
What does the account tell us
about the modes of
communication between the
Shaikh and his disciples?

Fig. 6.15

The dargah of Shaikh Salim Chishti
(a direct descendant of Baba Farid)
constructed in Fatehpur Sikri,
Akbar’s capital, symbolised the
bond between the Chishtis and the
Mughal state.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Source 9

Declining a royal gift

This excerpt from a sufi text describes the proceedings at
Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya’s hospice in 1313:

I (the author, Amir Hasan Sijzi) had the good
fortune of kissing his Ghaikh Nizamuddin Auliya’s)
feet ... At this time a local ruler had sent him the
deed of ownership to two gardens and much land,
along with the provisions and tools for their
maintenance. The ruler had also made it clear that
he was relinquishing all his rights to both the
gardens and land. The master ... had not accepted
that gift. Instead, he had lamented: “What have I to
do with gardens and fields and lands? ... None of...
our spiritual masters had engaged in such activity.”

Then he told an appropriate story: “... Sultan
Ghiyasuddin, who at that time was still known as
Ulugh Khan, came to visit Shaikh Fariduddin (and)
offered some money and ownership deeds for four
villages to the Shaikh, the money being for the benefit
of the dervishes (sufis), and the land for his use.
Smiling, Shaikh al Islam (Fariduddin) said: ‘Give me
the money. I will dispense it to the dervishes. But as
for those land deeds, keep them. There are many who
long for them. Give them away to such persons.’”

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS 161

Source 10

The One Lord

Here is a composition attributed
to Kabir:

8. NEW DEVOTIONAL PATHS
DIALOGUE AND DISSENT IN

NORTHERN INDIA
Many poet-saints engaged in explicit and implicit
dialogue with these new social situations, ideas and

institutions. Let us now see how this dialogue found
expression. We focus here on three of the most
influential figures of the time.

8.1 Weaving a divine fabric: Kabir

Kabir (c. fourteenth-fifteenth centuries) is perhaps
one of the most outstanding examples of a poet-saint
who emerged within this context. Historians have
painstakingly tried to reconstruct his life and times
through a study of compositions attributed to him
as well as later hagiographies. Such exercises have
proved to be challenging on a number of counts.

Verses ascribed to Kabir have been compiled in
three distinct but overlapping traditions. The Kabir
Bijak is preserved by the Kabirpanth (the path or
sect of Kabir) in Varanasi and elsewhere in Uttar
Pradesh; the Kabir Granthavali is associated with
the Dadupanth in Rajasthan, and many of his
compositions are found in the Adi Granth Sahib (see
Section 8.2). All these manuscript compilations
were made long after the death of Kabir. By the
nineteenth century, anthologies of verses attributed
to him circulated in print in regions as far apart as
Bengal, Gujarat and Maharashtra.

Kabir’s poems have survived in several languages
and dialects; and some are composed in the special
language of nirguna poets, the sant bhasha. Others,
known as ulatbansi (upside-down sayings), are
written in a form in which everyday meanings
are inverted. These hint at the difficulties of
capturing the nature of the Ultimate Reality in
words: expressions such as “the lotus which blooms
without flower” or the “fire raging in the ocean” convey
a sense of Kabir’s mystical experiences.

Also striking is the range of traditions Kabir drew
on to describe the Ultimate Reality. These include
Islam: he described the Ultimate Reality as Allah,
Khuda, Hazrat and Pir. He also used terms drawn
from Vedantic traditions, alakh (the unseen), nirakar
(formless), Brahman, Atman, etc. Other terms with
mystical connotations such as shabda (sound) or
shunya (emptiness) were drawn from yogic traditions.

Rationalised 2023-24

Tell me, brother, how can
there be

No one lord of the world
but two?

Who led you so astray?
God is called by many names:

Names like Allah, Ram, Karim,
Keshav, Hari, and Hazrat.

Gold may be shaped into
rings and bangles.

Isn't it gold all the same?

Distinctions are only words
we invent ...

Kabir says they are both
mistaken.

Neither can find the only
Ram. One kills the goat, the
other cows.

They waste their lives in
disputation.

eee ienieienion 1
| > What is Kabir’s

argument against the |
distinction made

| between gods of |
different communities?
162

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Diverse and sometimes conflicting ideas are
expressed in these poems. Some poems draw on
Islamic ideas and use monotheism and iconoclasm
to attack Hindu polytheism and idol worship; others
use the sufi concept of zikr and ishq (love) to express
the Hindu practice of nam-simaran (remembrance

of God’s name).

Were all these composed by Kabir? We may never
be able to tell with certainty, although scholars have
tried to analyse the language, style and content to
establish which verses could be Kabir’s. What this

Fig. 6.16

Roadside musicians, a seventeenth-
century Mughal painting

It is likely that the compositions
of the sants were sung by

such musicians.

Rationalised 2023-24

rich corpus of verses also signifies is that Kabir was
and is to the present a source of inspiration for
those who questioned entrenched religious and
social institutions, ideas and practices in their
search for the Divine.

Just as Kabir’s ideas probably
crystallised through dialogue
and debate (explicit or implicit)
with the traditions of sufis and
yogis in the region of Awadh (part
of present-day Uttar Pradesh),
his legacy was claimed by several
groups, who remembered him
and continue to do so.

This is most evident in later
debates about whether he was
a Hindu or a Muslim by birth,
debates that are reflected in
hagiographies. Many of these
were composed from the
seventeenth century onwards,
about 200 years after Kabir’s
lifetime.

Hagiographies within the
Vaishnava tradition attempted
to suggest that he was born a
Hindu, Kabirdas (Kabir itself is
an Arabic word meaning “great”),
but was raised by a poor
Muslim family belonging to
the community of weavers or
julahas, who were relatively
recent converts to Islam. They
also suggested that he was
initiated into bhakti by a guru,
perhaps Ramananda.
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

However, the verses attributed to Kabir use the
words guru and satguru, but do not mention the name
of any specific preceptor. Historians have pointed
out that it is very difficult to establish that
Ramananda and Kabir were contemporaries, without
assigning improbably long lives to either or both.
So, while traditions linking the two cannot be
accepted at face value, they show how important
the legacy of Kabir was for later generations.

8.2 Baba Guru Nanak and the Sacred Word

Baba Guru Nanak (1469-1539) was born in a Hindu
merchant family in a village called Nankana Sahib
near the river Ravi in the predominantly Muslim
Punjab. He trained to be an accountant and studied
Persian. He was married at a young age but he spent
most of his time among sufis and bhaktas. He also
travelled widely.

The message of Baba Guru Nanak is spelt out in
his hymns and teachings. These suggest that he
advocated a form of nirguna bhakti. He firmly
repudiated the external practices of the religions he
saw around him. He rejected sacrifices, ritual baths,
image worship, austerities and the scriptures of both
Hindus and Muslims. For Baba Guru Nanak,
the Absolute or “rab” had no gender or form. He
proposed a simple way to connect to the Divine by
remembering and repeating the Divine Name,
expressing his ideas through hymns called “shabad”
in Punjabi, the language of the region. Baba Guru
Nanak would sing these compositions in various
ragas while his attendant Mardana played the rabab.

Baba Guru Nanak organised his followers into a
community. He set up rules for congregational
worship (sangat) involving collective recitation. He
appointed one of his disciples, Angad, to succeed
him as the preceptor (guru), and this practice was
followed for nearly 200 years.

It appears that Baba Guru Nanak did not
wish to establish a new religion, but after his death
his followers consolidated their own practices
and distinguished themselves from both Hindus
and Muslims. The fifth preceptor, Guru Arjan,
compiled Baba Guru Nanak’s hymns along with
those of his four successors and other religious
poets like Baba Farid, Ravidas (also known as
Raidas) and Kabir in the Adi Granth Sahib. These
hymns, called “gurbani”, are composed in various

Rationalised 2023-24

163
164

Fig. 6.17

A fifteenth-century stone sculpture
(Tamil Nadw depicting Krishna
playing the flute, a form of the
deity worshipped by Mirabai

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

languages. In the late seventeenth century the tenth
preceptor, Guru Gobind Singh, included the
compositions of the ninth guru, Guru Tegh Bahadur,
and this scripture was called the Guru Granth Sahib.
Guru Gobind Singh also laid the foundation of the
Khalsa Panth (army of the pure) and defined its five
symbols: uncut hair, a dagger, a pair of shorts, a comb
and a steel bangle. Under him the community got
consolidated as a socio-religious and military force.

8.3 Mirabai, the devotee princess

Mirabai (c. fifteenth-sixteenth centuries) is perhaps
the best-known woman poet within the bhakti
tradition. Biographies have been reconstructed
primarily from the bhajans attributed to her, which
were transmitted orally for centuries. According to
these, she was a Rajput princess from Merta in
Marwar who was married against her wishes to a
prince of the Sisodia clan of Mewar, Rajasthan. She
defied her husband and did not submit to the
traditional role of wife and mother, instead
recognising Krishna, the avatar of Vishnu, as her
lover. Her in-laws tried to poison her, but she escaped
from the palace to live as a wandering saint
composing songs that are characterised by intense
expressions of emotion.

Source 11

Love for the Lord

This is part of a song attributed to Mirabai:
I will build a funeral pyre of sandalwood and aloe;
Light it by your own hand
When I am burned away to cinders;
Smear this ash upon your limbs.
... let flame be lost in flame.

In another verse, she sings:
What can Mewar’s ruler do to me?

If God is angry, all is lost,
But what can the Rana do?

l > What does this indicate about Mirabai’s

q attitude towards the king?

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

According to some traditions, her preceptor was
Raidas, a leather worker. This would indicate her
defiance of the norms of caste society. After
rejecting the comforts of her husband’s palace, she
is supposed to have donned the white robes of a
widow or the saffron robe of the renouncer.

Although Mirabai did not attract a sect or
group of followers, she has been recognised as a
source of inspiration for centuries. Her songs
continue to be sung by women and men, especially
those who are poor and considered “low caste” in
Gujarat and Rajasthan.

> Discuss...

Why do you think the traditions of Kabir, Baba
Guru Nanak and Mirabai remain significant in
the twenty-first century?

9. RECONSTRUCTING HISTORIES OF

RELIGIOUS TRADITIONS

We have seen that historians draw on a variety
of sources to reconstruct histories of religious
traditions — these include sculpture, architecture,
stories about religious preceptors, compositions
attributed to women and men engaged in the quest
of understanding the nature of the Divine.

As we have seen in Chapters 1 and 4, sculpture
and architecture can only be understood if we
have a grasp of the context — the ideas, beliefs and
practices of those who produced and used these
images and buildings. What about textual traditions
regarding religious beliefs? If you return to the
sources in this chapter, you will notice that they
include a wide variety, written in several different
languages and styles. They range from the
apparently simple, direct language of the vachanas
of Basavanna to the ornate Persian of the farman of
the Mughal emperors. Understanding each type of
text requires different skills: apart from a familiarity
with several languages, the historian has to be aware
of the subtle variations in style that characterise
each genre.

Rationalised 2023-24

165

Shankaradeva

In the late fifteenth century,
Shankaradeva emerged as one
of the leading proponents of
Vaishnavism in Assam. His
teachings, often known as the
Bhagavati dharma because they
were based on the Bhagavad
Gita and the Bhagavata Purana,
focused on absolute surrender
to the supreme deity, in this case
Vishnu. He emphasised the
need for naam kirtan, recitation
of the names of the lord in sat
sanga or congregations of pious
devotees. He also encouraged
the establishment of satra or
monasteries for the transmission
of spiritual knowledge, and
naam ghar or prayer halls.
Many of these institutions and
practices continue to flourish
in the region. His major
compositions include the
Kirtana-ghosha.
166 THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

(\atstins of soassuscdiomenauue

arieties of sources used to reconstruct
the history of sufi traditions

Awide range of texts were produced in and around sufi khanqgahs.
These included:

1.Treatises or manuals dealing with sufi thought and
practices — The Kashf-ul-Mahjub of Ali bin Usman Hujwiri (died
c. 1071) is an example of this genre. It enables historians to see
how traditions outside the subcontinent influenced sufi thought
in India.

2. Malfuzat (literally, “uttered”; conversations of sufi saints) —
An early text on malfuzat is the Fawa’id-al-Fu’ad, a collection of
conversations of Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya, compiled by Amir
Hasan $1jzi Dehlavi, a noted Persian poet. Source 9 contains an
excerpt from this text. Malfuzats were compiled by different sufi
silsilas with the permission of the shaikhs; these had obvious
didactic purposes. Several examples have been found from
different parts of the subcontinent, including the Deccan. They
were compiled over several centuries.

3. Maktubat (literally, “written” collections of letters); letters
written by sufi masters, addressed to their disciples and
associates — While these tell us about the shaikh’s experience
of religious truth that he wanted to share with others, they
also reflect the life conditions of the recipients and are responses
to their aspirations and difficulties, both spiritual and mundane.
The letters, known as Maktubat-i Imam Rabbani, of the noted
seventeenth-century Naqshbandi Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi
(d.1624), whose ideology is often contrasted with the liberal
and non-sectarian views of Akbar, are amongst those most
frequently discussed by scholars.

4. Tazkiras (literally, “to mention and memorialise”; biographical
accounts of saints) - The fourteenth-centurySiyar-ul-Auliya of
Mir Khwurd Kirmani was the first sufi tazkira written in India.
It dealt principally with the Chishti saints. The most famous tazkira
is the Akhbar-ul-Akhyar of Abdul Haqq Muhaddis Dehlavi
(d. 1642). The authors of the tazkiras often sought to establish
the precedence of their own orders and glorify their spiritual
genealogies. Many details are often implausible, full of elements
of the fantastic. Still they are of great value for historians and
help them to understand more fully the nature of the tradition.

Remember that each of the traditions we have been considering
in this chapter generated a wide range of textual and oral modes
of communication, some of which have been preserved, many
of which have been modified in the process of transmission, and
others are probably lost forever.

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS 167

Virtually all these religious traditions continue to
flourish to date. This continuity has certain
advantages for historians as it allows them to compare
contemporary practices with those described in textual
traditions or shown in old paintings and to trace
changes. At the same time, because these traditions
are part of peoples’ lived beliefs and practices, there
is often a lack of acceptance of the possibility that
these may have changed over time. The challenge for
historians is to undertake such investigations with
sensitivity, while at the same time recognising that
religious traditions, like other traditions, are dynamic
and change over time.

~

TIMELINE

SOME MAJOR RELIGIOUS TEACHERS IN THE SUBCONTINENT

c. 500-800 cE Appar, Sambandar, Sundaramurti in Tamil Nadu

c. 800-900 Nammalvar, Manikkavachakar, Andal, Tondaradippodi
in Tamil Nadu

c.1000-1100 Al Hujwiri, Data Ganj Bakhsh in the Punjab; Ramanujacharya
in Tamil Nadu

c.1100-1200 Basavanna in Karnataka

c.1200-1300 Jnanadeva, Muktabai in Maharashtra; Khwaja Muinuddin
Chishti in Rajasthan; Bahauddin Zakariyya and Fariduddin
Ganj-i Shakar in the Punjab; Qutbuddin Bakhtiyar Kaki in Delhi

c.1300-1400 Lal Ded in Kashmir; Lal Shahbaz Qalandar in Sind;
Nizamuddin Auliya in Delhi; Ramananda in Uttar Pradesh;
Chokhamela in Maharashtra; Sharafuddin Yahya Maneri in Bihar

c.1400-1500 Kabir, Raidas, Surdas in Uttar Pradesh; Baba Guru Nanak in the
Punjab; Vallabhacharya in Gujarat; Abdullah Shattari in Gwalior;
Muhammad Shah Alam in Gujarat; Mir Sayyid Muhammad Gesu
Daraz in Gulbarga, Shankaradeva in Assam; Tukaram in
Maharashtra

c.1500-1600 Sri Chaitanya in Bengal; Mirabai in Rajasthan; Shaikh Abdul
Quddus Gangohi, Malik Muhammad Jaisi, Tulsidas in
Uttar Pradesh

c.1600-1700 Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi in Haryana; Miyan Mir in the Punjab

\_ Note: These time frames indicate the approximate period during which these teachers lived.

S

Rationalised 2023-24
168

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

ANSWER IN100-150 WORDS

Explain with examples what historians mean by the
integration of cults.

To what extent do you think the architecture of
mosques in the subcontinent reflects a combination
of universal ideals and local traditions?

What were the similarities and differences between
the be-shari‘a and ba-shari‘a sufi traditions?

Discuss the ways in which the Alvars, Nayanars and
Virashaivas expressed critiques of the caste system.

Describe the major teachings of either Kabir or
Baba Guru Nanak, and the ways in which these
have been transmitted.

WRITE A SHORTESSAY (ABOUT
250-300 WORDS) ON THE FOLLOWING:

Discuss the major beliefs and practices that
characterised Sufism.

Examine how and why rulers tried to establish
connections with the traditions of the Nayanars and
the sufis.

Analyse, with illustrations, why bhakti and sufi
thinkers adopted a variety of languages in which
to express their opinions.

Read any five of the sources included in this chapter
and discuss the social and religious ideas that are
expressed in them.

10.

MAP WORK

On an outline map of India, plot three major sufi
shrines, and three places associated with temples
(one each of a form of Vishnu, Shiva and the
goddess).

Rationalised 2023-24
BHAKTI-SuFI TRADITIONS

a PROJECTS (CHOOSE ONE)

11. Choose any two of the religious teachers/thinkers/
saints mentioned in this chapter, and find out more
about their lives and teachings. Prepare a report
about the area and the times in which they lived,
their major ideas, how we know about them, and
why you think they are important.

12. Find out more about practices of pilgrimage
associated with the shrines mentioned in this
chapter. Are these pilgrimages still undertaken?
When are these shrines visited? Who visits these
shrines? Why do they do so? What are the activities
associated with these pilgrimages?

Fig. 6.18
The dargah of Shaikh Bahauddin Zakariya,
Multan (Pakistan)

Rationalised 2023-24

169

If you would like to know
more, read:

Richard M. Eaton (ed). 2003.
India’s Islamic Traditions.
Oxford University Press,

New Delhi.

John Stratton Hawley. 2005.
Three Bhakti Voices
Mirabai, Surdas and Kabir
in their times and ours.
Oxford University Press,
New Delhi.

David N. Lorenzen (ed.). 2004.
Religious Movements in

South Asia 600-1800.

Oxford University Press,

New Delhi,

A.K. Ramanujan. 1981.
Hymns for the Drowning.
Penguin, New Delhi.

Annemarie Schimmel. 1975.
Mystical Dimensions of Islam.
Univesity of North Carolina

Press, Chapel Hill.

David Smith. 1998.
The Dance of Siva: Religion
Artand Poetry in South India.
Cambridge Univesity Press,
New Delhi.

Charlotte Vaudeville. 1997.
A Weaver Named Kabir.
Oxford University Press,
New Delhi.

For more information,
you could visit:
http://www.alif-india.com

12094CHO7

THEME AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL

SEVEN VIJAYANAGARA
(C. FOURTEENTH TO SIXTEENTH CENTURY)

Vijayanagara or “city of victory” was the name of
both a city and an empire. The empire was founded
in the fourteenth century. In its heyday it stretched
from the river Krishna in the north to the extreme
south of the peninsula. In 1565 the city was sacked
and subsequently deserted. Although it fell into
ruin in the seventeenth-eighteenth centuries, it
lived on in the memories of people living in the
Krishna-Tungabhadra doab. They remembered it
as Hampi, a name derived from that of the local
mother goddess, Pampadevi. These oral traditions
combined with archaeological finds, monuments
and inscriptions and other records helped scholars
to rediscover the Vijayanagara Empire.

A part of the stone wall that was
built around the city of Vijjiayanagara

1. THE DISCOVERY OF HAMPI

The ruins at Hampi were brought to light in 1800 by
an engineer and antiquarian named Colonel Colin
Mackenzie. An employee of the English East India
Company, he prepared the first survey map of the
site. Much of the initial information he received was
based on the memories of priests of the Virupaksha
temple and the shrine of Pampadevi. Subsequently,
from 1856, photographers began to record the
monuments which enabled scholars to study them.
As early as 1836 epigraphists began collecting
several dozen inscriptions found at this and other
temples at Hampi. In an effort to reconstruct the
history of the city and the empire, historians collated
information from these sources with accounts of
foreign travellers and other literature written in
Telugu, Kannada, Tamil and Sanskrit.

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA

Source 1

Colin Mackenzie

Born in 1754, Colin Mackenzie became famous as an
engineer, surveyor and cartographer. In 1815 he was
appointed the first Surveyor General of India, a post
he held till his death in 1821. He embarked on collecting
local histories and surveying historic sites in order to
better understand India’s past and make governance of
the colony easier. He says that “it struggled long under
the miseries of bad management ... before the South
came under the benign influence of the British
government”. By studying Vijayanagara, Mackenzie
believed that the East India Company could gain “much
useful information on many of these institutions, laws
and customs whose influence still prevails among the
various Tribes of Natives forming the general mass of
the population to this day”.

2. RAYAS, NAYAKAS AND SULTANS
According to tradition and epigraphic evidence two
brothers, Harihara and Bukka, founded the
Vijayanagara Empire in 1336. This empire included
within its fluctuating frontiers peoples who spoke
different languages and followed different religious
traditions.

On their northern frontier, the Vijayanagara kings
competed with contemporary rulers — including the
Sultans of the Deccan and the Gajapati rulers of
Orissa — for control of the fertile river valleys and
the resources generated by lucrative overseas trade.
At the same time, interaction between these states
led to sharing of ideas, especially in the field of
architecture. The rulers of Vijayanagara borrowed
concepts and building techniques which they then
developed further.

Karnataka samrajyamu

While historians use the term Vijayanagara Empire,
contemporaries described it as the karnataka samrajyamu.

Rationalised 2023-24

171

Fig. 7.2
Mackenzie and his assistants
This is a copy by an

unknown artist of an oil
painting by the portrait
painter Thomas Hickey.

It dates to c.1825 and belongs
to the collection of the Royal
Asiatic Society of Britain and
Ireland. On Mackenzie’s left
is his peon Kistnaji holding

a telescope, on his right are
Brahmana assistants —

a Jaina pandit (right) and
behind him the Telugu
Brahmana Cauvellery
Ventak Letchmiah.

| > How has the artist
portrayed Mackenzie
and his indigenous
informers? What ideas
about him and his
informants are sought to
be impressed upon the
viewers?
172

Fig. 7.3
The gopuram or gateway of the
Brihadishvara temple at Thanjavur

Elephants, horses
and men

Gajapati literally means lord
of elephants. This was the name
of a ruling lineage that was
very powerful in Orissa in the
fifteenth century. In the popular
traditions of Vijayanagara the
Deccan Sultans are termed as
ashvapati or lord of horses and
the rayasare called narapati or
lord of men.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Some of the areas that were incorporated within
the empire had witnessed the development of
powerful states such as those of the Cholas in Tamil
Nadu and the Hoysalas in Karnataka. Ruling elites
in these areas had extended patronage to elaborate
temples such as the Brihadishvara temple at
Thanjavur and the Chennakeshava temple at Belur.
The rulers of Vijayanagara, who called themselves
rayas, built on these traditions and carried them,
as we will see, literally to new heights.

2.1 Kings and traders

As warfare during these times depended upon
effective cavalry, the import of horses from Arabia
and Central Asia was very important for rival
kingdoms. This trade was initially controlled by Arab
traders. Local communities of merchants known as
kudirai chettis or horse merchants also participated
in these exchanges. From 1498 other actors appeared
on the scene. These were the Portuguese, who arrived
on the west coast of the subcontinent and attempted
to establish trading and military stations. Their
superior military technology, especially the use of
muskets, enabled them to become important players
in the tangled politics of the period.

In fact, Vijayanagara was also noted for its
markets dealing in spices, textiles and precious
stones. Trade was often regarded as a status symbol
for such cities, which boasted of a wealthy population
that demanded high-value exotic goods, especially
precious stones and jewellery. The revenue derived

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA

from trade in turn contributed significantly to the
prosperity of the state.

2.2 The apogee and decline of the empire
Within the polity, claimants to power included
members of the ruling lineage as well as military
commanders. The first dynasty, known as the
Sangama dynasty, exercised control till 1485.
They were supplanted by the Saluvas, military
commanders, who remained in power till 1503
when they were replaced by the Tuluvas.
Krishnadeva Raya belonged to the Tuluva dynasty.

Krishnadeva Raya’s rule was characterised by
expansion and consolidation. This was the time
when the land between the Tungabhadra and
Krishna rivers (the Raichur doab) was acquired
(1512), the rulers of Orissa were subdued (1514) and
severe defeats were inflicted on the Sultan of Bijapur
(1520). Although the kingdom remained in a constant
state of military preparedness, it flourished under
conditions of unparalleled peace and prosperity.
Krishnadeva Raya is credited with building some
fine temples and adding impressive gopurams to
many important south Indian temples. He also
founded a suburban township near Vijayanagara
called Nagalapuram after his mother. Some of the
most detailed descriptions of Vijayanagara come from
his time or just after.

Strain began to show within the imperial structure
following Krishnadeva Raya’s death in 1529. His
successors were troubled by rebellious nayakas or
military chiefs. By 1542 control at the centre had
shifted to another ruling lineage, that of the Aravidu,
which remained in power till the end of the
seventeenth century. During this period, as indeed
earlier, the military ambitions of the rulers
of Vijayanagara as well as those of the Deccan
Sultanates resulted in shifting alignments.
Eventually this led to an alliance of the Sultanates
against Vijayanagara. In 1565 Rama Raya, the chief
minister of Vijayanagara, led the army into battle
at Rakshasi-Tangadi (also known as Talikota), where
his forces were routed by the combined armies
of Bijapur, Anmadnagar and Golconda. The victorious
armies sacked the city of Vijayanagara. The city was
totally abandoned within a few years. Now the focus
of the empire shifted to the east where the Aravidu

Rationalised 2023-24

173

Source 2

Kings and traders

Krishnadeva Raya (ruled 1509-29),
the most famous ruler of
Vijayanagara, composed a work
on statecraft in Telugu known
as the Amuktamalyada. About
traders he wrote:

Aking should improve the
harbours of his country
and so encourage its
commerce that horses,
elephants, precious gems,
sandalwood, pearls and
other articles are freely
imported ... He should
arrange that the foreign
sailors who land in

| his country on account
of storms, illness and

§ exhaustion are looked after

f in a suitable manner ...
Make the merchants of
distant foreign countries
who import elephants and
good horses be attached
to yourself by providing
them with daily audience,
presents and allowing
decent profits. Then those
articles will never go to
your enemies.

| D> Why do you think

| the king was interested
| in encouraging trade?

| Which groups of people
| would have benefited

| from these
| transactions?
174

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Map 1
South India,
c. fourteenth-eighteenth century

| D Identify the present-day states
| that formed part of the empire.

Yavana is a Sanskrit word used
for the Greeks and other peoples
who entered the subcontinent
from the north west.

Bidar = Warangal
Gulbarga oo
Bi 3 Golconda
ijapur J
%
Krishna 2
Tungabhadra ~ * we
/ Hyderabad s
Goa\* Vijayanagara of
ii Pdi e Masulipatnam
.
. e
a
a &
Chitradurga o S
Bhatkal\e Sikkeri) .® a &
e ° ~~
.
Basrur 4 ti oe . Ne
(Barcelor) Chandragiri a
e e Kolar
z Ps . ¢ oe Mylapore
S Mangaloree, — ~~ Kanchipuram
3 ‘
3 .
Q Mysore’ =o Gingee
> 7
es
Cammemens - A Chidambaram
Calicut S. w
® ~eThanjavur
oh °
eee dural
%e jadurai
Cochin °
. Ramanathapursm =
_e
Quilon 1 irunelveli
s
4
| Sri Lanka
| Indian Ocean
i Sketch map not to scale

dynasty ruled from Penukonda and later from
Chandragiri (near Tirupati).

Although the armies of the Sultans were responsible
for the destruction of the city of Vijayanagara, relations
between the Sultans and the rayas were not always
or inevitably hostile, in spite of religious differences.
Krishnadeva Raya, for example, supported some
claimants to power in the Sultanates and took pride
in the title “establisher of the Yavana kingdom”.
Similarly, the Sultan of Bijapur intervened to resolve
succession disputes in Vijayanagara following the
death of Krishnadeva Raya. In fact the Vijayanagara
kings were keen to ensure the stability of the
Sultanates and vice versa. It was the adventurous
policy of Rama Raya who tried to play off one Sultan
against another that led the Sultans to combine
together and decisively defeat him.

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA

2.3 The rayas and the nayakas

Among those who exercised power in the empire were
military chiefs who usually controlled forts and had
armed supporters. These chiefs often moved from
one area to another, and in many cases were
accompanied by peasants looking for fertile land on
which to settle. These chiefs were known as nayakas
and they usually spoke Telugu or Kannada. Many
nayakas submitted to the authority of the kings of
Vijayanagara but they often rebelled and had to be
subdued by military action.

The amara-nayaka system was a major political
innovation of the Vijayanagara Empire. It is likely
that many features of this system were derived from
the igta system of the Delhi Sultanate.

The amara-nayakas were military commanders
who were given territories to govern by the raya.
They collected taxes and other dues from peasants,
craftspersons and traders in the area. They retained
part of the revenue for personal use and for
maintaining a stipulated contingent of horses
and elephants. These contingents provided the
Vijayanagara kings with an effective fighting force
with which they brought the entire southern
peninsula under their control. Some of the revenue
was also used for the maintenance of temples and
irrigation works.

The amara-nayakas sent tribute to the king
annually and personally appeared in the royal court
with gifts to express their loyalty. Kings occasionally
asserted their control over them by transferring them
from one place to another. However, during the course
of the seventeenth century, many of these nayakas
established independent kingdoms. This hastened
the collapse of the central imperial structure.

> Discuss...

Locate Chandragiri, Madurai, Ikkeri, Thanjavur
and Mysore, all centres of nayaka power, on

Map 1. Discuss the ways in which rivers and hills
may have facilitated or hindered communication
with Vijayanagara in each case.

Rationalised 2023-24

175

Amara is believed to be derived
from the Sanskrit word samara,
meaning battle or war. It also
resembles the Persian term
amir, meaning a high noble.
176 THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

3. VIJAYANAGARA

THE CAPITAL AND ITS ENVIRONS

Like most capitals, Vijayanagara, was characterised
by a distinctive physical layout and building style.

Fig. 7.4
Plan of Vijayanagara

| > Identify three major zones on

| the plan. Look at the central part.
| Can you see channels connecting
| up with the river? See how many
| fortification walls you can trace.

| Was the sacred centre fortified?

Finding out about

the city

A large number of inscriptions
of the kings of Vijayanagara
and their nayakas recording
donations to temples as well as
describing important events
have been recovered. Several
travellers visited the city and
wrote about it. Notable among
their accounts are those of an
Italian trader named Nicolo de
Conti, an ambassador named

Source 3

Abdur Razzaq sent by the ruler
of Persia, a merchant named : :
Afanasii Nikitin from Russia, A sprawling UAy

all of whom visited the city in
the fifteenth century, and those This is an excerpt from Domingo Paes’s description of
of Duarte Barbosa, Domingo Vijayanagara:

Paes and Fernao Nuniz from
Portugal, who came in the
sixteenth century.

The size of this city I do not write here, because it
cannot all be seen from any one spot, but I climbed a
hill whence I could see a great part of it; | could not see
it all because it lies between several ranges of hills. What
Isaw from thence seemed to me as large as Rome, and

[TTT TTT TTT TTT ‘7
© Would vou find these features very beautiful to the sight; there are many groves of
. P na ° Why d trees within it, in the gardens of the houses, and many
ina city today’s ¥ co you conduits of water which flow into the midst of it, and in

places there are lakes; and the king has close to his

bodies were selected for special palace a palm-grove and other rich fruit-bearing trees.

| |
| |
| think the gardens and water |
| mention by Paes? |

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA 177

3.1 Water resources Source 4

The most striking feature about the location of :
Vijayanagara is the natural basin formed by the
river Tungabhadra which flows in a north-easterly

direction. The surrounding landscape is characterised
by stunning granite hills that seem to form a girdle

About a tank constructed by
Krishnadeva Raya, Paes wrote:

around the city. A number of streams flow down to
the river from these rocky outcrops.

In almost all cases embankments were built along
these streams to create reservoirs of varying sizes.
As this is one of the most arid zones of the peninsula,
elaborate arrangements had to be made to store
rainwater and conduct it to the city. The most
important such tank was built in the early years
of the fifteenth century and is now called
Kamalapuram tank. Water from this tank not only
irrigated fields nearby but was also conducted
through a channel to the “royal centre”.

One of the most prominent waterworks to be seen
among the ruins is the Hiriya canal. This canal drew
water from a dam across the Tungabhadra and
irrigated the cultivated valley that separated the
“sacred centre” from the “urban core”. This was
apparently built by kings of the Sangama dynasty.

3.2 Fortifications and roads

Before we examine the different parts of the city in
detail let us look at what enclosed them all - the
great fortress walls. Abdur Razzaq, an ambassador
sent by the ruler of Persia to Calicut (present-day
Kozhikode) in the fifteenth century, was greatly
impressed by the fortifications, and mentioned
seven lines of forts. These encircled not only the
city but also its agricultural hinterland and forests.
The outermost wall linked the hills surrounding

The king made a tank ... at
the mouth of two hills
so that all the water
which comes from either
one side or the other
collects there; and, besides
this, water comes to it
from more than three
leagues (approximately 15
kilometres) by pipes which
run along the lower parts of
the range outside. This
water is brought from a lake
which itself overflows into a
little river. The tank has three
large pillars handsomely
carved with figures; these
connect above with certain
pipes by which they get
water when they have to
irrigate their gardens and
rice-fields. In order to make
this tank the said king broke
down a hill ... In the tank I
saw so many people at work
that there must have been
fifteen or twenty thousand
men, looking like ants ...

the city. The massive masonry construction was Fig. 7.5

slightly tapered. No mortar or cementing agent was’) a, aqueduct leading into the royal
employed anywhere in the construction. The stone centre

blocks were wedge shaped, which held them in
place, and the inner portion of the walls was of
earth packed with rubble. Square or rectangular
bastions projected outwards.

What was most significant about this fortification
is that it enclosed agricultural tracts. Abdur Razzaq
noted that “between the first, second and the third
walls there are cultivated fields, gardens and houses”.
And Paes observed: “From this first circuit until you

Rationalised 2023-24
178

Fig. 7.6
A gateway in the fortification wall

| Describe the similarities

| and differences between

| these two entrances.

| Why do you think the rulers
of Vijayanagara adopted

| elements of Indo-Islamic

| architecture?

Fig. 7.7
A gopuram

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

enter the city there is a great distance, in which are
fields in which they sow rice and have many gardens
and much water, in which water comes from two
lakes.” These statements have been corroborated by
present-day archaeologists, who have also found
evidence of an agricultural tract between the sacred
centre and the urban core. This tract was serviced
by an elaborate canal system drawing water from
the Tungabhadra.

Why do you think agricultural tracts were
incorporated within the fortified area? Often, the
objective of medieval sieges was to starve the
defenders into submission. These sieges could last
for several months and sometimes even years.
Normally rulers tried to be prepared for such
situations by building large granaries within
fortified areas. The rulers of Vijayanagara adopted
a more expensive and elaborate strategy of protecting
the agricultural belt itself.

A second line of fortification went round the
inner core of the urban complex, and a third line
surrounded the royal centre, within which each set
of major buildings was surrounded by its own
high walls.

The fort was entered through well-guarded gates,
which linked the city to the major roads. Gateways
were distinctive architectural features that often
defined the structures to which they regulated
access. The arch on the gateway leading into the
fortified settlement as well as the dome over the
gate (Fig. 7.6) are regarded as typical features of the
architecture introduced by the Turkish Sultans. Art
historians refer to this style as Indo-Islamic, as it
grew continually through interaction with local
building practices in different regions.

Archaeologists have studied roads within the city
and those leading out from it. These have been
identified by tracing paths through gateways, as well
as by finds of pavements. Roads generally wound
around through the valleys, avoiding rocky terrain.
Some of the most important roads extended from
temple gateways, and were lined by bazaars.

3.3 The urban core

Moving along the roads leading into the urban core,
there is relatively little archaeological evidence of
the houses of ordinary people. Archaeologists have

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA

found fine Chinese porcelain in some areas,
including in the north-eastern corner of the urban
core and suggest that these areas may have been
occupied by rich traders. This was also the Muslim
residential quarter. Tombs and mosques located
here have distinctive functions, yet their architecture
resembles that of the mandapas found in the temples
of Hampi.

This is how the sixteenth-century Portuguese
traveller Barbosa described the houses of ordinary
people, which have not survived: “The other houses
of the people are thatched, but nonetheless well built
and arranged according to occupations, in long
streets with many open places.”

Field surveys indicate that the entire area was
dotted with numerous shrines and small temples,
pointing to the prevalence of a variety of cults,
perhaps supported by different communities. The
surveys also indicate that wells, rainwater tanks as
well as temple tanks may have served as sources of
water to the ordinary town dwellers.

4. THE ROYAL CENTRE

The royal centre was located in the south-western
part of the settlement. Although designated as a royal
centre, it included over 60 temples. Clearly, the
patronage of temples and cults was important for
rulers who were trying to establish and legitimise
their authority through association with the
divinities housed in the shrines.

About thirty building complexes have been
identified as palaces. These are relatively large
structures that do not seem to have been associated

Rationalised 2023-24

Fig. 7.8

CLS. a
> What kinds of vessels l

do you think these shards
were originally parts of? |
L

ee 4
Fig. 7.10
A mosque in Vijayanagara
CLL a
| > Does the mosque have l
the typical features of
| Indo-Islamic architecture? |
be 4
> Discuss...

Compare the layout of
Vijayanagara with that of
your town or village.
180 THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

fr... \ with ritual functions. One difference between
A House of Victory? these structures and temples is that the latter
were constructed entirely of masonry, while the

Tinie ts Solna Paes Ihec t® say superstructure of the secular buildings was made

about the audience hall and of perishable materials
the mahanavami dibba, which P .

together he called the “House
of Victory”:

4.1 The mahanavami dibba
Some of the more distinctive structures in the area

These buildings have
two platforms one above
the other, beautifully
sculpted ... On the upper
platform ... in this House
of Victory the king has a
room made of cloth ...
where the idol has a shrine
... and in the other in the
middle is placed a dais on
which stands a throne of
state, (the crown and the
royal anklet) ...

have been assigned names based on the form of
the buildings as well as their functions. The “king’s
palace” is the largest of the enclosures but has not
yielded definitive evidence of being a royal residence.
It has two of the most impressive platforms, usually
called the “audience hall” and the “mahanavami
dibba”. The entire complex is surrounded by high
double walls with a street running between them.
The audience hall is a high platform with slots for
wooden pillars at close and regular intervals. It had
a staircase going up to the second floor, which rested
on these pillars. The pillars being closely spaced,
would have left little free space and thus it is not

clear what the hall was used for.

Located on one of the highest points in the city,
the “mahanavami dibba” is a massive platform rising
from a base of about 11,000 sq. ft to a height of
AO ft. There is evidence that it supported a wooden
structure. The base of the platform is covered with
relief carvings (Fig. 7.12).

Rituals associated with the structure probably
coincided with Mahanavami (literally, the great ninth
day) of the ten-day Hindu festival during the autumn
months of September and October, known variously
as Dusehra (northern India), Durga Puja (in Bengal)

Fig. 7.11
The mahanavami dibba

Fig. 7.12
Carvings on the mahanavami
dibba

> Can you identify the themes
of the carvings?

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA

and Navaratri or Mahanavami (in peninsular India).
The Vijayanagara kings displayed their prestige, power
and suzerainty on this occasion.

The ceremonies performed on the occasion included
worship of the image, worship of the state horse, and
the sacrifice of buffaloes and other animals. Dances,
wrestling matches, and processions of caparisoned
horses, elephants and chariots and soldiers, as well
as ritual presentations before the king and his
guests by the chief nayakas and subordinate kings
marked the occasion. These ceremonies were imbued
with deep symbolic meanings. On the last day of the
festival the king inspected his army and the armies
of the nayakas in a grand ceremony in an open field.
On this occasion the nayakas brought rich gifts for
the king as well as the stipulated tribute.

Was the “mahanavami dibba” that stands today
the centre of this elaborate ritual? Scholars have
pointed out that the space surrounding the structure
does not seem to have been adequate for elaborate
processions of armed men, women, and large
numbers of animals. Like some of the other
structures in the royal centre, it remains an enigma.

4.2 Other buildings in the royal centre

One of the most beautiful buildings in the royal
centre is the Lotus Mahal, so named by British
travellers in the nineteenth century. While the name
is certainly romantic, historians are not quite sure

Rationalised 2023-24

181

Fig. 7.13

An elevation drawing of the

Lotus Mahal

An elevation is a vertical view of

any object or structure. It gives

you an idea of features that

cannot be seen in a photograph.

Notice the arches. These were

probably inspired by Indo-Islamic

techniques.

CE 7

| S Compare Figs. 7.13 and

| 7.15, and make a list of the
features that are common to
both, as well as those that can
be seen in only one. Also

| compare the arch in Fig. 7.14

l with the arch in Fig. 7.6. The

fr Lotus Mahal had nine towers —

r a high central one, and eight
along the sides. How many can

| you see in the photograph and
how many in the elevation?

| If you had to rename the Lotus

| Mahal, what would you call it?

|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
za

Fig. 7.14
Detail of an arch of
the Lotus Mahal

182 THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Fig. 7.15
A photograph of the Lotus Mahal

what the building was used for. One suggestion,
found in a map drawn by Mackenzie, is that it
may have been a council chamber, a place where
the king met his advisers.

While most temples were located in the sacred
centre, there were several in the royal centre as well.

| > Compare Figs. 7.16 a |

| and 7.16 b with Fig. 7.17, |

l making a list of features l
visible in each one.

| Do you think these were |

| actually elephant stables? |

Lalit mil aliguilalisiel le
CRAs ORS

Fig. 7.16 a Elevation of the “elephant stables”

Fig. 7.17 “Elephant stables” located close to the Lotus Mahal

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA 183

Fig. 7.18
Sculpture from the Hazara Rama temple

a i aa 7a

| > Can you identify scenes of dancing? l
Why do you think elephants and horses

| were depicted on the panels? |

— et Na 4

One of the most spectacular of these is one known as
the Hazara Rama temple. This was probably meant
to be used only by the king and his family. The images
in the central shrine are missing; however, sculpted
panels on the walls survive. These include scenes
from the Ramayana sculpted on the inner walls of
the shrine.

While many of the structures at Vijayanagara
were destroyed when the city was sacked, traditions
of building palatial structures were continued by
the nayakas. Many of these buildings have survived.

> Discuss... Pg. 1 ne audience hall
Why did the nayakas continue with the building Interior of the audience ha

at Madurai
traditions of the rulers of Vijayanagara? Note the arches.

Rationalised 2023-24
184

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

5. THE SACRED CENTRE

5.1 Choosing a capital

We now move to the rocky northern end of the city
on the banks of the Tungabhadra. According to local
tradition, these hills sheltered the monkey kingdom
of Vali and Sugriva mentioned in the Ramayana.
Other traditions suggest that Pampadevi, the local
mother goddess, did penance in these hills in order
to marry Virupaksha, the guardian deity of the
kingdom, also recognised as a form of Shiva. To this
day this marriage is celebrated annually in the
Virupaksha temple. Among these hills are found
Jaina temples of the pre-Vijayanagara period as well.
In other words, this area was associated with several
sacred traditions.

Temple building in the region had a long history,
going back to dynasties such as the Pallavas,
Chalukyas, Hoysalas and Cholas. Rulers very often
encouraged temple building as a means of
associating themselves with the divine - often, the
deity was explicitly or implicitly identified with the
king. Temples also functioned as centres of learning.
Besides, rulers and others often granted land and
other resources for the maintenance of temples.
Consequently, temples developed as significant
religious, social, cultural and economic centres. From
the point of view of the rulers, constructing, repairing
and maintaining temples were important means
of winning support and recognition for their power,
wealth and piety.

It is likely that the very choice of the site of
Vijayanagara was inspired by the existence of the
shrines of Virupaksha and Pampadevi. In fact the
Vijayanagara kings claimed to rule on behalf of
the god Virupaksha. All royal orders were signed
“Shri Virupaksha”, usually in the Kannada script.
Rulers also indicated their close links with the gods
by using the title “Hindu Suratrana”. This was a
Sanskritisation of the Arabic term Sultan, meaning
king, so it literally meant Hindu Sultan.

Even as they drew on earlier traditions, the rulers
of Vijayanagara innovated and developed these.
Royal portrait sculpture was now displayed in
temples, and the king’s visits to temples were treated
as important state occasions on which he was
accompanied by the important nayakas of the empire.

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA 185

S Fig. 7.20
“~— An aerial view of the
Virupaksha temple

5.2. Gopurams and mandapas

In terms of temple architecture, by this period
certain new features were in evidence. These
included structures of immense scale that must have

been a mark of imperial authority, best exemplified
by the raya gopurams (Fig. 7.7) or royal gateways
that often dwarfed the towers on the central shrines,
and signalled the presence of the temple from a great

Fig. 7.21

A plan of the Virupaksha
temple

Most of the square
structures are shrines.
The two major gateways
are shaded in black.
Each tiny dot represents
a pillar. Rows of pillars
arranged in lines

within a square or
rectangular frame appear
to demarcate major halls,
pavilions and corridors.

| > Using the scalein |
| the plan, measure the |
| distance from the main |
| gopuramto the central |
| shrine. What would |
| have been the easiest |
| |
| |
L

access from the tank to
the shrine?

Rationalised 2023-24
1

86

Fig. 7.22

A kalyana mandapa, meant to

celebrate divine weddings

Fig. 7.23

A line drawing of a sculpted pillar

L

| > Describe what you see on

the pillar.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

distance. They were also probably meant as
reminders of the power of kings, able to command
the resources, techniques and skills needed to
construct these towering gateways. Other distinctive
features include mandapas or pavilions and
long, pillared corridors that often ran around the
shrines within the temple complex. Let us look at
two temples more closely —- the Virupaksha temple
and the Vitthala temple.

The Virupaksha temple was built over centuries.
While inscriptions suggest that the earliest
shrine dated to the ninth-tenth centuries, it was
substantially enlarged with the establishment
of the Vijayanagara Empire. The hall in front of
the main shrine was built by Krishnadeva Raya to
mark his accession. This was decorated with
delicately carved pillars. He is also credited with

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA 187

the construction of the eastern gopuram. These
additions meant that the central shrine came to
occupy a relatively small part of the complex.

The halls in the temple were used for a variety of
purposes. Some were spaces in which the images of
gods were placed to witness special programmes of
music, dance, drama, etc. Others were used to
celebrate the marriages of deities, and yet others
were meant for the deities to swing in. Special images,
distinct from those kept in the small central shrine,
were used on these occasions.

Fig. 7.24
The chariot of the Vitthala temple

mene, er aun |
> Do you think chariots

would have actually been built

| like this? |
Ez. mw a

Fig. 7.25
Swing pavilion from Gingee

Rationalised 2023-24
188

Fig. 7.26
A gopuram built by the nayakas
of Madurai

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Another shrine, the Vitthala temple, is also
interesting. Here, the principal deity was Vitthala, a
form of Vishnu generally worshipped in Maharashtra.
The introduction of the worship of the deity in
Karnataka is another indication of the ways in which
the rulers of Vijayanagara drew on different traditions
to create an imperial culture. As in the case of other
temples, this temple too has several halls and a
unique shrine designed as a chariot (Fig. 7.24).

A characteristic feature of the temple complexes
is the chariot streets that extended from the temple
gopuram in a straight line. These streets were paved
with stone slabs and lined with pillared pavilions in
which merchants set up their shops.

Just as the nayakas continued with and elaborated
on traditions of fortification, so they did with
traditions of temple building. In fact, some of the
most spectacular gopurams were also built by the
local nayakas.

> Discuss...
How and why did the rulers of Vijayanagara adopt
and adapt earlier traditions of ritual architecture?

6. PLOTTING PALACES, TEMPLES

AND BAZAARS

We have been examining a wealth of information on
Vijayanagara - photographs, plans, elevations of
structures and sculpture. How was all of this
produced? After the initial surveys by Mackenzie,
information was pieced together from travellers’
accounts and inscriptions. Through the twentieth
century, the site was preserved by the Archaeological
Survey of India and the Karnataka Department of
Archaeology and Museums. In 1976, Hampi was
recognised as a site of national importance. Then,
in the early 1980s, an important project was
launched to document the material remains at
Vijayanagara in detail, through extensive and
intensive surveys, using a variety of recording
techniques. Over nearly twenty years, dozens of

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA 189

pew
E

scholars from all over the

world worked to compile and

preserve this information.
Let us look at just one

18°26

part of this enormous BE
exercise — mapping - in |
pping eA

more detail. The first step
was to divide the entire
area into a set of 25
squares, each designated by
a letter of the alphabet. Then,
each of the small squares
was subdivided into a set
of even smaller squares. But
this was not all: each of
these smaller squares was
further subdivided into yet
smaller units.

As you can see, these
detailed surveys have
been extremely painstaking,
and have recovered and
documented traces of
thousands of structures -
from tiny shrines and
residences to elaborate
temples. They have also led
to the recovery of traces of
roads, paths, bazaars, etc.

15°21

4 adirempuramg
1S
Nagenahalli ae

ok

nrasayanagedi
mn yancigedi

ae

1576)

Fig. 7.27

A detailed map of the site

(top right)

a a 7
> Which is the letter of the

|
| alphabet that was not used? |
|
|

| Using the scale in the map,
measure the length of any
one of the small squares.

Fig. 7.28
Square N of Fig. 7.27 (right)

> What is the scale used
| Ne |
on this map? 0 scm Tam

Rationalised 2023-24
190 THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Fig. 7.29
N M Square NM of Fig. 7.28
e — WD tentA@ eee tS 7
bo ey pho NG \ | Kw By | cc > Identify a temple.

Look for walls, a central shrine,
and traces of paths leading to the
temple. Name the squares on

the map which contain the plan
of the temple.

gk s sy
“sy 271 ning 96 \
JA 5

The latter have been located
through finds of pillar bases
and platforms - all that remain
of thriving markets.

It is worth remembering
something that John M. Fritz,
George Michell and M.S. Nagaraja
Rao, who worked for years at the
site, wrote: “In our study of these
monuments of Vijayanagara we
have to imagine a whole series
of vanished wooden elements -
columns, brackets, beams,
ceilings, overhanging eaves, and
towers — decorated with plaster
and painted, perhaps brightly.”

Although wooden structures are
lost, and only stone structures
survive, the descriptions left by
travellers allow us to reconstruct
some aspects of the vibrant life of
the times.

Fig. 7.30
Plan of the temple in Fig 7.29

| > Identify the gopuram, halls,
| colonnades and central shrine.
| Which areas would you pass l
| |

through to reach the central
shrine from the outer entrance?

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA

Source 5

The bazaar

Paes gives a vivid description of the bazaar:

Going forward, you have a broad and beautiful street
... In this street live many merchants, and there you
will find all sorts of rubies, and diamonds, and emeralds,
and pearls, and seed-pearls, and cloths, and every other
sort of thing there is on earth and that you may wish to
buy. Then you have there every evening a fair where
they sell many common horses and nags, and also many
citrons, and limes, and oranges, and grapes, and every
other kind of garden stuff, and wood; you have all in
this street.

More generally, he described the city as being “the best-
provided city in the world” with the markets “stocked with
provisions such as rice, wheat, grains, India corn and a
certain amount of barley and beans, moong, pulses
and horse-gram” all of which were cheaply and abundantly
available. According to Fernao Nuniz, the Viayanagara
markets were “overflowing with abundance of fruits,
grapes and oranges, limes, pomegranates, jackfruit and
mangoes and all very cheap”. Meat too was sold in
abundance in the marketplaces. Nuniz describes “mutton,
pork, venison, partridges, hares, doves, quail and all kinds
of birds, sparrows, rats and cats and lizards” as being
sold in the market of Bisnaga (Vijayanagara).

7. QUESTIONS IN SEARCH
OF ANSWERS

Buildings that survive tell us about the way spaces
were organised and used, how they were built, with
what materials and techniques. For example, we
can assess the defence requirements and military
preparedness of a city by studying its fortifications.
Buildings also tell us about the spread of ideas and
cultural influences if we compare them with
buildings in other places. They convey ideas which
the builders or their patrons wished to project. They
are often suffused with symbols which are a product
of their cultural context. These we can understand
when we combine information from other sources
like literature, inscriptions and popular traditions.

Rationalised 2023-24

191
192

Kri

shnadeva Raya

To recapitulate about some of
the problems of perspective,
look at this beautiful statue
of Krishnadeva Raya placed
on the gopuram of the temple
at Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu.
This is obviously the way in
which the ruler wanted to
project himself.

And this is how Paes
describes the king:

Of medium height, and of
fair complexion and good
figure, rather fat than thin;
he has on his face signs of
smallpox.

Fig. 7.31

a Se a

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Investigations of architectural features do not
tell us what ordinary men, women and children,
comprising the vast majority of the people who lived
in the city and its outskirts, thought about these
impressive buildings. Would they have had access
to any of the areas within the royal centre or the
sacred centre? Would they hurry past the sculpture,
or would they pause to see, reflect and try and
understand its complicated symbolism? And what
did the people who worked on these colossal
construction projects think of the enterprises to
which they had contributed their labour?

While rulers took all important decisions about the
buildings to be constructed, the site, the material to
be used and the style to be followed, who possessed
the specialised, knowledge required for such
enormous enterprises? Who drew up the plans for
the buildings? Where did the masons, stonecutters,
sculptors who did the actual building come from?
Were they captured during war from neighbouring
regions? What kind of wages did they get? Who
supervised the building activity? How was building
material transported and where did it come from?
These are some of the questions that we cannot
answer by merely looking at the buildings or their
remains. Continuing research using other sources
might provide some further clues.

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA

Fig. 7.32

i as the queen’s bath

193

Part of a structure known

TIMELINE 1
MAJOR POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS

‘\

c.1200-1300

Establishment of the Delhi Sultanate (1206)

c.1300-1400

Establishment of the Vijayanagara Empire (13367);
establishment of the Bahmani kingdom (1347);
Sultanates in Jaunpur, Kashmir and Madura

c. 1400-1500

Establishment of the Gajapati kingdom of Orissa (1435);
Establishment of the Sultanates of Gujarat and Malwa;
Emergence of the Sultanates of Anmadnagar, Bijapur
and Berar (1490)

c. 1500-1600

Conquest of Goa by the Portuguese (1510);

Collapse of the Bahmani kingdom,

emergence of the Sultanate of Golconda (1518);
Establishment of the Mughal empire by Babur (1526)

Note: Question mark indicates uncertain date.

TIMELINE 2

LANDMARKS IN THE DISCOVERY AND CONSERVATION

OF VIJAYANAGARA

1800 Colin Mackenzie visits Vijayanagara

1856 Alexander Greenlaw takes the first detailed photographs
of archaeological remains at Hampi

1876 J.F. Fleet begins documenting the inscriptions on the
temple walls at the site

1902 Conservation begins under John Marshall

1986 Hampi declared a World Heritage site by UNESCO

Rationalised 2023-24
194

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

ANSWER IN 100-150 WORDS

What have been the methods used to study the ruins
of Hampi over the last two centuries? In what
way do you think they would have complemented
the information provided by the priests of the
Virupaksha temple?

How were the water requirements of Vijayanagara
met?

What do you think were the advantages and
disadvantages of enclosing agricultural land within
the fortified area of the city?

What do you think was the significance of the rituals
associated with the mahanavami dibba?

Fig. 7.33 is an illustration of another pillar from the
Virupaksha temple. Do you notice any floral motifs?
What are the animals shown? Why do you think they
are depicted? Describe the human figures shown.

egO2 x,

WRITE. A SHORT ESSAY (ABOUT
250-300 WORDS) ON THE FOLLOWING:

Discuss whether the term “royal centre” is an
appropriate description for the part of the city for which
itis used.

What does the architecture of buildings like the Lotus
Mahal and elephant stables tell us about the rulers
who commissioned them?

What are the architectural traditions that inspired the
architects of Vijayanagara? How did they transform
these traditions?

What impression of the lives of the ordinary people of
Vijayanagara can you cull from the various
descriptions in the chapter?

Rationalised 2023-24
AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA

fa

10.

MAP WORK

On an outline map of the world, mark
approximately Italy, Portugal, Iran and Russia.
Trace the routes the travellers mentioned on p.176
would have taken to reach Vijayanagara.

11.

12.

PROJECT (CHOOSE ONE)

Find out more about any one of the major cities
which flourished in the subcontinent during
c. fourteenth-seventeenth centuries. Describe the
architecture of the city. Are there any features to
suggest that these were political centres? Are there
buildings that were ritually significant? Is there
an area for commercial activities? What are the
features that distinguish the urban layout from that
of surrounding areas?

Visit a religious building in your neighbourhood.
Describe, with sketches, its roof, pillars and
arches if any, corridors, passages, halls, entrance,
water supply, etc. Compare these features with
those of the Virupaksha temple. Describe what
each part of the building is used for. Find out
about its history.

Rationalised 2023-24

195

Lis

If you would like to know
more, read:

Vasundhara Filliozat. 2006 (rpt).
Vijayanagara.

National Book Trust,

New Delhi.

George Michell. 1995.
Architecture and Art of
Southern India.

Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

KA. Nilakanta Sastri. 1955.
A History of South India.
Oxford University Press,
New Delhi.

Burton Stein. 1989.
Vijayanagara (The New
Cambridge History of India
Vol.1, Part 2).

Foundation Books, New Delhi.

©

For more information, ~~ ©
you could visit:
http://www.museum.upenn.edu/

new/research/Exp_Rese_Disc/
Asia/vrp/HTML/Vijay_Hist.shtml
12094CHOS

PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS
Walls AND THE STATE

AGRARIAN SOCIETY AND THE MUGHAL EMPIRE
(C. SIXTEENTH- SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES)

EIGHT

During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
about 85 per cent of the population of India lived in
its villages. Both peasants and landed elites were
involved in agricultural production and claimed
rights to a share of the produce. This created
relationships of cooperation, competition and
conflict among them. The sum of these agrarian
relationships made up rural society.

At the same time agencies from outside also
entered into the rural world. Most important among
these was the Mughal state, which derived the
bulk of its income from agricultural production.
Agents of the state — revenue assessors, collectors,
record keepers — sought to control rural society so
as to ensure that cultivation took place and the
state got its regular share of taxes from the

produce. Since many crops were grown for sale,
A rural scene trade, money and markets entered the villages and
Detail from a seventeenth-century g
Mughal painting linked the agricultural areas with the towns.

Fig. 8.1

1. PEASANTS AND AGRICULTURAL

PRODUCTION
The basic unit of agricultural society was the village,
inhabited by peasants who performed the manifold
seasonal tasks that made up agricultural production
throughout the year -— tilling the soil, sowing seeds,
harvesting the crop when it was ripe. Further, they
contributed their labour to the production of
agro-based goods such as sugar and oil.

But rural India was not characterised by settled
peasant production alone. Several kinds of areas
such as large tracts of dry land or hilly regions were
not cultivable in the same way as the more fertile

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

expanses of land. In addition, forest areas made up
a substantial proportion of territory. We need to keep
this varied topography in mind when discussing
agrarian society.

1.1 Looking for sources

Our understanding of the workings of rural society does
not come from those who worked the land, as peasants
did not write about themselves. Our major source for
the agrarian history of the sixteenth and early
seventeenth centuries are chronicles and documents
from the Mughal court (see also Chapter 9).

One of the most important chronicles was the
Ain-i Akbari (in short the Ain, see also Section 8)
authored by Akbar’s court historian Abu’l Fazl. This
text meticulously recorded the arrangements made
by the state to ensure cultivation, to enable the
collection of revenue by the agencies of the state
and to regulate the relationship between the state
and rural magnates, the zamindars.

The central purpose of the Ain was to present a
vision of Akbar’s empire where social harmony was
provided by a strong ruling class. Any revolt or assertion
of autonomous power against the Mughal state was,
in the eyes of the author of the Ain, predestined to fail.
In other words, whatever we learn from the Ain about
peasants remains a view from the top.

Fortunately, however, the account of the Ain can
be supplemented by descriptions contained in sources
emanating from regions away from the Mughal
capital. These include detailed revenue records from
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Rajasthan dating from
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Further,
the extensive records of the East India Company (see
also Chapter 10) provide us with useful descriptions
of agrarian relations in eastern India. All these
sources record instances of conflicts between
peasants, zamindars and the state. In the process
they give us an insight into peasants’ perception of
and their expectations of fairness from the state.

1.2 Peasants and their lands

The term which Indo-Persian sources of the Mughal
period most frequently used to denote a peasant was
raiyat (plural, riaya) or muzarian. In addition, we
also encounter the terms kisan or asami. Sources of
the seventeenth century refer to two kinds of
peasants — khud-kashta and pahi-kashta. The former

Rationalised 2023-24

197
198

Source 1

Peasants on the move

This was a feature of agrarian
society which struck a keen
observer like Babur, the first
Mughal emperor, forcefully
enough for him to write about it
in the Babur Nama, his memoirs:

In Hindustan hamlets and
villages, towns indeed, are
depopulated and set up in
amoment! Ifthe people ofa
large town, one inhabited
for years even, flee from it,
they do it in such a way that
not a sign or trace of them
remains in a day and a half.
On the other hand, if they
fix their eyes on a place to
settle, they need not dig
water courses because their
crops are all rain-grown,
and as the population of
Hindustan is unlimited it
swarms in. They make a tank
ora well; they need not build
houses or set up walls ...
khas-grass abounds, wood
is unlimited, huts are made,
and straightaway there isa
village or a town!

|
> Describe the aspects l

l of agricultural life that l
struck Babur as

| particular to regions in |

| northern India. |

1a

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

were residents of the village in which they held their
lands. The latter were non-resident cultivators who
belonged to some other village, but cultivated lands
elsewhere on a contractual basis. People became
pahi-kashta either out of choice — for example, when
terms of revenue in a distant village were more
favourable -— or out of compulsion - for example,
forced by economic distress after a famine.

Seldom did the average peasant of north India
possess more than a pair of bullocks and two
ploughs; most possessed even less. In Gujarat
peasants possessing about six acres of land were
considered to be affluent; in Bengal, on the other
hand, five acres was the upper limit of an average
peasant farm; 10 acres would make one a rich asami.
Cultivation was based on the principle of individual
ownership. Peasant lands were bought and sold in
the same way as the lands of other property owners.

This nineteenth-century description of peasant
holdings in the Delhi-Agra region would apply equally
to the seventeenth century:

The cultivating peasants (asamis), who plough
up the fields, mark the limits of each field, for
identification and demarcation, with borders of
(raised) earth, brick and thorn so that thousands
of such fields may be counted in a village.

1.3 Irrigation and technology

The abundance of land, available labour and the
mobility of peasants were three factors that
accounted for the constant expansion of agriculture.
Since the primary purpose of agriculture is to feed
people, basic staples such as rice, wheat or millets
were the most frequently cultivated crops. Areas
which received 40 inches or more of rainfall a year
were generally rice-producing zones, followed by
wheat and millets, corresponding to a descending
scale of precipitation.

Monsoons remained the backbone of Indian
agriculture, as they are even today. But there were
crops which required additional water. Artificial
systems of irrigation had to be devised for this.

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE 199

Source 2

Irrigating trees and fields

This is an excerpt from the Babur Nama that describes the
irrigation devices the emperor observed in northern India:

The greater part of Hindustan country is situated on level land.
Many though its towns and cultivated lands are, it nowhere
has running waters ... For ... water is not at all a necessity in
cultivating crops and orchards. Autumn crops grow by the

downpour of the rains themselves; and strange it is that spring cs 4
crops grow even when no rains fall. (However) toyoungtrees | 5 Compare the
water is made to flow by means of buckets or wheels ... | irrigation devices

In Lahore, Dipalpur (both in present-day Pakistan) and those | observed by Babur with
other parts, people water by means ofa wheel. They make two | what you have learnt
circles of rope long enough to suit the depths of the well, fix | about irrigation in
strips of wood between them, and on these fasten pitchers. Vijayanagara
The ropes with the wood and attached pitchers are put over (Chapter 7). What kind

the wheel-well. At one end of the wheel-axle a second wheel is |
fixed, and close to it another on an upright axle. The last wheel |
the bullock turns; its teeth catch in the teeth of the second
(wheel), and thus the wheel with the pitchers is turned. A
trough is set where the water empties from the pitchers and
from this the water is conveyed everywhere.

of resources would each
of these systems
require? Which systems
| could ensure the
| participation of peasants
| in improving

In Agra, Chandwar, Bayana (allin present-day UttarPradesh) | agricultural technology? |
and those parts again, people water with a bucket ... At the L
well-edge they set up a fork of wood, having a roller adjusted Fig. 6.2
between the forks, tie a rope to a large bucket, put the rope A recons tructed Persian
over a roller, and tie its other end to the bullock. One person uitael, dleserthadl here
must drive the bullock, another empty the bucket.

a

i
4

Mr Seen oe

Teena ae ewAINR 022188 oe
a plate
Mo Se

Rationalised 2023-24
200

(“he spread of tobacco »

The spread of tobacco

This plant, which arrived first
in the Deccan, spread to
northern India in the early years
of the seventeenth century. The
Ain does not mention tobacco
in the lists of crops in northern
India. Akbar and his nobles came
across tobacco for the first time
in 1604. At this time smoking
tobacco (in hookahsor chillums)
seems to have caught on in
a big way. Jahangir was so
concerned about its addiction
that he banned it. This was totally
ineffective because by the
end of the seventeenth century,
tobacco had become a major
article of consumption, cultivation
and trade all over India.

Agricultural prosperity
and population growth

One important outcome of such
varied and flexible forms of
agricultural production was
a slow demographic growth.
Despite periodic disruptions
caused by famines and
epidemics, India’s population
increased, according to
calculations by economic
historians, by about 50 million
people between 1600 and 1800,
which is an increase of about
33 per cent over 200 years.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Irrigation projects received state support as well.
For example, in northern India the state undertook
digging of new canals (nahr, nala) and also repaired
old ones like the shahnahr in the Punjab during Shah
Jahan’s reign.

Though agriculture was labour intensive, peasants
did use technologies that often harnessed cattle
energy. One example was the wooden plough, which
was light and easily assembled with an iron tip or
coulter. It therefore did not make deep furrows, which
preserved the moisture better during the intensely
hot months. A drill, pulled by a pair of giant oxen,
was used to plant seeds, but broadcasting of
seed was the most prevalent method. Hoeing and
weeding were done simultaneously using a narrow
iron blade with a small wooden handle.

1.4 An abundance of crops
Agriculture was organised around two major
seasonal cycles, the kharif (autumn) and the rabi
(spring). This would mean that most regions, except
those terrains that were the most arid or
inhospitable, produced a minimum of two crops a
year (do-fasla), whereas some, where rainfall or
irrigation assured a continuous supply of water, even
gave three crops. This ensured an enormous variety
of produce. For instance, we are told in the Ain that
the Mughal provinces of Agra produced 39 varieties
of crops and Delhi produced 43 over the two seasons.
Bengal produced 50 varieties of rice alone.

However, the focus on the cultivation of basic
staples did not mean that agriculture in medieval
India was only for subsistence. We often come across
the term jins-i kamil (literally, perfect crops) in our
sources. The Mughal state also encouraged peasants
to cultivate such crops as they brought in more
revenue. Crops such as cotton and sugarcane were
Jins-i kamil par excellence. Cotton was grown over a
great swathe of territory spread over central India
and the Deccan plateau, whereas Bengal was famous
for its sugar. Such cash crops would also include
various sorts of oilseeds (for example, mustard) and
lentils. This shows how subsistence and commercial
production were closely intertwined in an average
peasant’s holding.

During the seventeenth century several new crops
from different parts of the world reached the Indian

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

subcontinent. Maize (makka), for example, was
introduced into India via Africa and Spain and by
the seventeenth century it was being listed as one
of the major crops of western India. Vegetables like
tomatoes, potatoes and chillies were introduced from
the New World at this time, as were fruits like the
pineapple and the papaya.

2. THE VILLAGE COMMUNITY

The above account makes it clear that agricultural
production involved the intensive participation and
initiative of the peasantry. How did this affect the
structure of agrarian relations in Mughal society?
To find out, let us look at the social groups involved
in agricultural expansion, and at their relationships
and conflicts.

We have seen that peasants held their lands in
individual ownership. At the same time they belonged
to a collective village community as far as many
aspects of their social existence were concerned.
There were three constituents of this community -
the cultivators, the panchayat, and the village
headman (mugaddam or mandal).

2.1 Caste and the rural milieu

Deep inequities on the basis of caste and other caste-
like distinctions meant that the cultivators were a
highly heterogeneous group. Among those who tilled
the land, there was a sizeable number who worked
as menials or agricultural =

labourers (majur).

Despite the abundance of
cultivable land, certain caste
groups were assigned menial
tasks and thus relegated to
poverty. Though there was
no census at that time, the
little data that we have
suggest that such groups
comprised a large section of
the village population, had
the least resources and were
constrained by their position
in the caste hierarchy, much
like the Dalits of modern
India. Such distinctions had
begun permeating into other

Rationalised 2023-24

201

> Discuss...

Identify the technologies

and agricultural practices
described in this section that
appear similar to or different
from those described in
Chapter 2.

Fig. 8.3
An early nineteenth-century
painting depicting a village in

the Punjab
ee 5
> Describe what women and |
men are shown doing in the
illustration as well as the |
architecture of the village. |
ee 4

202

Corrupt mandals

The mandals often misused their
positions. They were principally
accused of defrauding village
accounts in connivance with the
patwari, and for underassessing
the revenue they owed from
their own lands in order to pass
the additional burden on to the
smaller cultivator.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

communities too. In Muslim communities menials like
the halalkhoran (scavengers) were housed outside the
boundaries of the village; similarly the mallahzadas
(literally, sons of boatmen) in Bihar were comparable
to slaves.

There was a direct correlation between caste,
poverty and social status at the lower strata of
society. Such correlations were not so marked at
intermediate levels. In a manual from seventeenth-
century Marwar, Rajputs are mentioned as peasants,
sharing the same space with Jats, who were accorded
a lower status in the caste hierarchy. The Gauravas,
who cultivated land around Vrindavan (Uttar
Pradesh), sought Rajput status in the seventeenth
century. Castes such as the Ahirs, Gujars and Malis
rose in the hierarchy because of the profitability of
cattle rearing and horticulture. In the eastern
regions, intermediate pastoral and fishing castes
like the Sadgops and Kaivartas acquired the status
of peasants.

2.2 Panchayats and headmen

The village panchayat was an assembly of elders,
usually important people of the village with hereditary
rights over their property. In mixed-caste villages,
the panchayat was usually a heterogeneous body. An
oligarchy, the panchayat represented various castes
and communities in the village, though the village
menial-cum-agricultural worker was unlikely to be
represented there. The decisions made by these
panchayats were binding on the members.

The panchayat was headed by a headman known
as mugaddam or mandal. Some sources suggest that
the headman was chosen through the consensus of
the village elders, and that this choice had to be
ratified by the zamindar. Headmen held office as long
as they enjoyed the confidence of the village elders,
failing which they could be dismissed by them. The
chief function of the headman was to supervise the
preparation of village accounts, assisted by the
accountant or patwari of the panchayat.

The panchayat derived its funds from
contributions made by individuals to a common
financial pool. These funds were used for defraying
the costs of entertaining revenue officials who
visited the village from time to time. Expenses for
community welfare activities such as tiding over

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

natural calamities (like
floods), were also met from
these funds. Often these
funds were also deployed in
construction of a bund or
digging a canal which
peasants usually could not
afford to do on their own.
One important function of
the panchayat was to ensure
that caste boundaries among
the various communities
inhabiting the village were
upheld. In eastern India all
marriages were held in the
presence of the mandal. In other words one of the
duties of the village headman was to oversee the
conduct of the members of the village community
“chiefly to prevent any offence against their caste”.
Panchayats also had the authority to levy fines
and inflict more serious forms of punishment like
expulsion from the community. The latter was a
drastic step and was in most cases meted out for a
limited period. It meant that a person forced to leave
the village became an outcaste and lost his right
to practise his profession. Such a measure was
intended as a deterrent to violation of caste norms.
In addition to the village panchayat each caste
or jati in the village had its own jati panchayat.
These panchayats wielded considerable power
in rural society. In Rajasthan jati panchayats
arbitrated civil disputes between members of
different castes. They mediated in contested claims
on land, decided whether marriages were performed
according to the norms laid down by a particular
caste group, determined who had ritual precedence
in village functions, and so on. In most cases,
except in matters of criminal justice, the state
respected the decisions of jati panchayats.
Archival records from western India - notably
Rajasthan and Maharashtra - contain petitions
presented to the panchayat complaining about
extortionate taxation or the demand for unpaid
labour (begar) imposed by the “superior” castes or
officials of the state. These petitions were usually
made by villagers, from the lowest rungs of rural
society. Often petitions were made collectively as

Rationalised 2023-24

203

Fig. 8.4

An early nineteenth-century
painting depicting a meeting of
village elders and tax collectors

|
L

> How has the artist
differentiated between the
village elders and the

tax collectors?
204 THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

well, by a caste group or a community protesting
against what they considered were morally
illegitimate demands on the part of elite groups.
These included excessive tax demands which,
especially in times of drought or other disasters,
endangered the peasants’ subsistence. In the eyes
of the petitioners the right to the basic minimum for
survival was sanctioned by custom. They regarded
the village panchayat as the court of appeal that
"> Describe the activities thart | would ensure that the state carried out its moral

| are shown in the illustration. | obligations and guaranteed justice.
be 4 The decision of the panchayat in
, conflicts between “lower-caste”
peasants and state officials or the
local zamindar could vary from
case to case. In cases of excessive
revenue demands, the panchayat
often suggested compromise. In
cases where reconciliation failed,
peasants took recourse to more
drastic forms of resistance, such as
deserting the village. The relatively
easy availability of uncultivated land
and the competition over labour
resources made this an effective
weapon in the hands of cultivators.

Fig. 8.5
A seventeenth-century painting
ces textile production

SoCal aca tester

nips Ee

2.3 Village artisans
Another interesting aspect of
the village was the elaborate
relationship of exchange between
different producers. Marathi
documents and village surveys
made in the early years of British
rule have revealed the existence of
substantial numbers of artisans,
sometimes as high as 25 per cent of
the total households in the villages.
At times, however, the distinction
between artisans and peasants in
village society was a fluid one, as
many groups performed the tasks
of both. Cultivators and their
— families would also participate in
Roe sa) = craft production - such as dyeing,
Ke a \V ix os Salle fon a) textile printing, baking and firing
Poel aigprstol Possact of pottery, making and repairing

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

agricultural implements. Phases in the agricultural
calendar when there was a relative lull in activity,
as between sowing and weeding or between weeding
and harvesting, were a time when cultivators could
engage in artisanal production.

Village artisans — potters, blacksmiths, carpenters,
barbers, even goldsmiths — provided specialised
services in return for which they were compensated
by villagers by a variety of means. The most common
way of doing so was by giving them a share of the
harvest, or an allotment of land, perhaps cultivable
wastes, which was likely to be decided by the
panchayat. In Maharashtra such lands became the
artisans’ miras or watan — their hereditary holding.

Another variant of this was a system where
artisans and individual peasant households entered
into a mutually negotiated system of remuneration,
most of the time goods for services. For example,
eighteenth-century records tell us of zamindars in
Bengal who remunerated blacksmiths, carpenters,
even goldsmiths for their work by paying them “a
small daily allowance and diet money”. This later
came to be described as the jajmani system,
though the term was not in vogue in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. Such evidence is
interesting because it indicates the intricate ways
in which exchange networks operated at the
micro-level of the village. Cash remuneration was
not entirely unknown either.

2.4 A “little republic”?

How does one understand the significance of the
village community? Some British officials in the
nineteenth century saw the village as a “little
republic” made up of fraternal partners sharing
resources and labour in a collective. However, this
was not a sign of rural egalitarianism. There was
individual ownership of assets and deep inequities
based on caste and gender distinctions. A group
of powerful individuals decided the affairs of the
village, exploited the weaker sections and had the
authority to dispense justice.

More importantly, a cash nexus had already
developed through trade between villages and towns.
In the Mughal heartland too, revenue was assessed
and collected in cash. Artisans producing for the
export market (for example, weavers) received their

Rationalised 2023-24

205
206 THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

advances or wages in cash, as did producers of

Money in the village commercial products like cotton, silk or indigo.

The seventeenth-century French
traveller Jean-Baptiste Tavernier > Discuss...
found it remarkable that in
“India a village must be very small
indeed if it has not a money-
changer called a Shroff. (They)
act as bankers to make
remittances of money (and

who) enhance the rupee as 3. WOMEN IN AGRARIAN SOCIETY

ney please tor paisa ain ins As you may have observed in many different societies,
paisa for these (cowrie) shells’. the ducti ft : 1 d
production process often involves men an
women performing certain specified roles. In the
contexts that we are exploring, women and men had
to work shoulder to shoulder in the fields. Men
tilled and ploughed, while women sowed, weeded,
threshed and winnowed the harvest. With the growth
of nucleated villages and expansion in individuated
peasant farming, which characterised medieval
Indian agriculture, the basis of production was the
labour and resources of the entire household.
Naturally, a gendered segregation between the home
(for women) and the world (for men) was not possible
in this context. Nonetheless biases related to women’s
. biological functions did continue. Menstruating
Fig. 8.6 ‘
Ashnayfhen anor women, for instance, were not allowed to touch the
plough or the potter’s wheel in western India, or
enter the groves where betel-leaves (paan) were
grown in Bengal.

Artisanal tasks such as spinning yarn, sifting and
kneading clay for pottery, and embroidery were among
the many aspects of production dependent on female
labour. The more commercialised the product, the
greater the demand on women’s labour to produce it.
In fact, peasant and artisan women worked not only
in the fields, but even went to the houses of their
employers or to the markets if necessary.

Women were considered an important resource in
agrarian society also because they were child bearers
in a society dependent on labour. At the same time,
high mortality rates among women - owing to
malnutrition, frequent pregnancies, death during
childbirth — often meant a shortage of wives. This
led to the emergence of social customs in peasant
and artisan communities that were distinct from

In what ways do you think the panchayats
described in this section were similar to or
different from present-day gram panchayats?

Fig. 8.7
A woman spinning thread

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE 207

those prevalent among elite groups. Marriages in
many rural communities required the payment of
bride-price rather than dowry to the bride’s family.
Remarriage was considered legitimate both among
divorced and widowed women.

The importance attached to women as a
reproductive force also meant that the fear of losing
control over them was great. According to established
social norms, the household was headed by a male.
Thus women were kept under strict control by the
male members of the family and the community.
They could inflict draconian punishments if they
suspected infidelity on the part of women.

Documents from Western India - Rajasthan, Gujarat
and Maharashtra — record petitions sent by women to
the village panchayat, seeking redress and justice.
Wives protested against the infidelity of their
husbands or the neglect of the wife and children by
the male head of the household, the grihasthi. While
male infidelity was not always punished, the state
and “superior” caste groups did intervene when it came
to ensuring that the family was adequately provided
for. In most cases when women petitioned to the
panchayat, their names were excluded from the
record: the petitioner was referred to as the mother,
sister or wife of the male head of the household.

Amongst the landed gentry, women had the right
to inherit property. Instances from the Punjab show
that women, including widows, actively participated
in the rural land market as sellers of property inherited
by them. Hindu and Muslim women inherited
zamindaris which they were free to sell or mortgage.
Women zamindars were known in eighteenth-century
Bengal. In fact, one of the biggest and most famous of
the eighteenth-century zamindaris, that of Rajshahi,
had a woman at the helm.

Fig. 8.8 a
The construction of Fatehpur Sikri —
women crushing stones

Fig. 8.8 b
=> Discuss... Women. carrying loads
Migrant women from neighbouring

, : villages often worked at such
women have to agricultural land in your state? construction sites.

Are there any differences in the access men and

Rationalised 2023-24
208

Fig. 8.9
Painting of Shah Jahan hunting

nilgais (from the Badshah Nama)

| > Describe what you see

| in this painting. What is the

symbolic element that helps
establish the connection

between the hunt and

ideal justice?

4
|
|
|
|
|

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

4, FORESTS AND TRIBES

4.1 Beyond settled villages

There was more to rural India than sedentary
agriculture. Apart from the intensively cultivated
provinces in northern and north-western India,
huge swathes of forests - dense forest (jangal) or
scrubland (kharbandi) -— existed all over eastern
India, central India, northern India (including the
Terai on the Indo-Nepal border), Jharkhand, and in
peninsular India down the Western Ghats and the
Deccan plateau. Though it is nearly impossible to
set an all-India average of the forest cover for this
period, informed conjectures based on contemporary
sources suggest an average of 40 per cent.

Forest dwellers were termed jangli in
contemporary texts. Being jangli, however, did
not mean an absence of “civilisation”,
as popular usage of the term today
seems to connote. Rather, the term
described those whose livelihood
came from the gathering of forest
produce, hunting and_ shifting
agriculture. These activities were
largely season specific. Among the
Bhils, for example, spring was reserved
for collecting forest produce, summer
for fishing, the monsoon months
for cultivation, and autumn and
winter for hunting. Such a sequence
presumed and perpetuated mobility,
which was a distinctive feature of
tribes inhabiting these forests.

For the state, the forest was a
subversive place - a place of refuge
(mawas) for troublemakers. Once
again, we turn to Babur who says that
jungles provided a good defence “behind
which the people of the pargana
become stubbornly rebellious and
pay no taxes”.

4.2 Inroads into forests

External forces entered the forest in
different ways. For instance, the state
required elephants for the army. So
the peshkash levied from forest people
often included a supply of elephants.

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE 209

In the Mughal political ideology, the hunt Pargana was an administrative
symbolised the overwhelming concern of the state subdivision of a Mughal province.
to relate to all its subjects, rich and poor. Regular
hunting expeditions, so court historians tell us,
enabled the emperor to travel across the extensive
territories of his empire and personally attend to the
grievances of its inhabitants. The hunt was a subject
frequently painted by court artists. The painter Peshkashwas a form of tribute
resorted to the device of inserting a small scene  ©llected by the Mughal state.
somewhere in the picture that functioned as a symbol
of a harmonious reign.

Source 3

Clearance of forests for
agricultural settlements

This is an excerpt from a sixteenth-century Bengali poem,
Chandimangala, composed by Mukundaram Chakrabarti.
The hero of the poem, Kalaketu, set up a kingdom by
clearing forests:

Hearing the news, outsiders came from various lands.
Kalaketu then bought and distributed among them
Heavy knives, axes, battle-axes and pikes.

From the north came the Das (people)

One hundred of them advanced.

They were struck with wonder on seeing Kalaketu
Who distributed betel-nut to each of them.

From the south came the harvesters

Five hundred of them under one organiser.

From the west came Zafar Mian,

Together with twenty-two thousand men.
Sulaimani beads in their hands

They chanted the names of their pir and paighambar
(Prophet).

Having cleared the forest

> What forms of intrusion into

the forest does the text evoke?

|

They established markets. |
Hundreds and hundreds of foreigners Compare its message with that |
|

|

Ate and entered the forest. of the miniature painting in
Fig. 8.9. Who are the people
identified as “foreigners” from the |
perspective of the forest dwellers? |

Hearing the sound of the axe,
Tigers became apprehensive and ran away, roaring.

Rationalised 2023-24
210

| D> What are the modes of

| transport described in this

| Passage? Why do you think

l they were used? Explain what
each of the articles brought from

| the plains to the hills may have

| been used for.

Fig. 8.10
A peasant and a hunter listening
to a sufi singer

if

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Source 4

Trade between the hill tribes

and the plains, c. 1595

This is how Abu'l Fazl describes the transactions between
the hill tribes and the plains in the suba of Awadh (part
of present-day Uttar Pradesh):

From the northern mountains quantities of goods are
carried on the backs of men, of stout ponies and of
goats, such as gold, copper, lead, musk, tails of the
kutas cow (the yak), honey, chuk (an acid composed
of orange juice and lemon boiled together),
pomegranate seed, ginger, long pepper, majith (a plant
producing a red dye) root, borax, zedoary (a root
resembling turmeric), wax, woollen stuffs, wooden
ware, hawks, falcons, black falcons, merlins (a kind of
bird), and other articles. In exchange they carry back
white and coloured cloths, amber, salt, asafoetida,
ornaments, glass and earthen ware.

The spread of commercial agriculture was an
important external factor that impinged on the lives
of those who lived in the forests. Forest products -
like honey, beeswax and gum lac - were in great
demand. Some, such as gum lac, became major items
of overseas export from India in the seventeenth
century. Elephants were also captured and sold.
Trade involved an exchange of commodities through
barter as well. Some tribes, like the Lohanis in the
Punjab, were engaged in overland trade, between
India and Afghanistan, and in the town-country
trade in the Punjab itself.

Social factors too wrought changes in the lives of
forest dwellers. Like the “big men” of the village
community, tribes also had their chieftains. Many
tribal chiefs had become zamindars, some even
became kings. For this they required to build up an
army. They recruited people from their lineage
groups or demanded that their fraternity provide
military service. Tribes in the Sind region had armies
comprising 6,000 cavalry and 7,000 infantry. In
Assam, the Ahom kings had their paiks, people who
were obliged to render military service in exchange
for land. The capture of wild elephants was declared
a royal monopoly by the Ahom kings.

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

Though the transition from a tribal to a
monarchical system had started much earlier, the
process seems to have become fully developed only
by the sixteenth century. This can be seen from
the Ain’s observations on the existence of tribal
kingdoms in the north-east. War was a common
occurrence. For instance, the Koch kings fought
and subjugated a number of neighbouring tribes in
a long sequence of wars through the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries.

New cultural influences also began to penetrate
into forested zones. Some historians have indeed
suggested that sufi saints (pirs) played a major role
in the slow acceptance of Islam among agricultural
communities emerging in newly colonised places
(see also Chapter 6).

5. THE ZAMINDARS

Our story of agrarian relations in Mughal India will
not be complete without referring to a class of
people in the countryside that lived off agriculture
but did not participate directly in the processes of
agricultural production. These were the zamindars
who were landed proprietors who also enjoyed certain
social and economic privileges by virtue of their
superior status in rural society. Caste was one factor
that accounted for the elevated status of zamindars;
another factor was that they performed certain
services (khidmat) for the state.

The zamindars held extensive personal lands
termed milkiyat, meaning property. Milkiyat lands
were cultivated for the private use of zamindars,
often with the help of hired or servile labour. The
zamindars could sell, bequeath or mortgage these
lands at will.

Zamindars also derived their power from the fact
that they could often collect revenue on behalf of
the state, a service for which they were compensated
financially. Control over military resources was
another source of power. Most zamindars had
fortresses (qilachas) as well as an armed contingent
comprising units of cavalry, artillery and infantry.

Thus if we visualise social relations in the
Mughal countryside as a pyramid, zamindars clearly
constituted its very narrow apex. Abu’l Fazl’s account
indicates that an “upper-caste”, Brahmana-Rajput

Rationalised 2023-24

211

> Discuss...

Find out which areas are
currently identified as forest
zones in your state. Is life in
these areas changing today?
Are the factors responsible for
these changes different from
or identical to those
mentioned in this section?
A parallel army!

According to the Ain, the
combined military strength of
the zamindars in Mughal India
was 384,558 cavalry, 4,277,057
infantry, 1,863 elephants, 4,260
cannons, and 4,500 boats.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

combine had already established firm control
over rural society. It also reflects a fairly large
representation from the so-called intermediate castes,
as we saw earlier, as well as a liberal sprinkling of
Muslim zamindaris.

Contemporary documents give an impression that
conquest may have been the source of the origin of
some zamindaris. The dispossession of weaker people
by a powerful military chieftain was quite often a
way of expanding a zamindari. It is, however, unlikely
that the state would have allowed such a show of
aggression by a zamindar unless he had been
confirmed by an imperial order (sanad).

More important were the slow processes of
zamindari consolidation, which are also documented
in sources. These involved colonisation of new lands,
by transfer of rights, by order of the state and by
purchase. These were the processes which perhaps
permitted people belonging to the relatively “lower”
castes to enter the rank of zamindars as zamindaris
were bought and sold quite briskly in this period.

A combination of factors also allowed the
consolidation of clan- or lineage-based zamindaris.
For example, the Rajputs and Jats adopted these
strategies to consolidate their control over vast
swathes of territory in northern India. Likewise,
peasant-pastoralists (like the Sadgops) carved out
powerful zamindaris in areas of central and south-
western Bengal.

Zamindars spearheaded the colonisation of
agricultural land, and helped in settling cultivators
by providing them with the means of cultivation,
including cash loans. The buying and selling of
zamindaris accelerated the process of monetisation
in the countryside. In addition, zamindars sold the
produce from their milkiyat lands. There is evidence
to show that zamindars often established markets (haats)
to which peasants also came to sell their produce.

Although there can be little doubt that zamindars
were an exploitative class, their relationship with the
peasantry had an element of reciprocity, paternalism
and patronage. Two aspects reinforce this view. First,
the bhakti saints, who eloquently condemned
caste-based and other forms of oppression (see also
Chapter 6), did not portray the zamindars (or,
interestingly, the moneylender) as exploiters or
oppressors of the peasantry. Usually it was the

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

revenue official of the state who was the object of their
ire. Second, in a large number of agrarian uprisings
which erupted in north India in the seventeenth
century, zamindars often received the support of the
peasantry in their struggle against the state.

6. LAND REVENUE SYSTEM

Revenue from the land was the economic mainstay
of the Mughal Empire. It was therefore vital for the
state to create an administrative apparatus to ensure
control over agricultural production, and to fix and
collect revenue from across the length and breadth
of the rapidly expanding empire. This apparatus
included the office (daftar) of the ditvan who was
responsible for supervising the fiscal system of the
empire. Thus revenue officials and record keepers
penetrated the agricultural domain and became a
decisive agent in shaping agrarian relations.

The Mughal state tried to first acquire specific
information about the extent of the agricultural
lands in the empire and what these lands produced
before fixing the burden of taxes on people. The
land revenue arrangements consisted of two
stages — first, assessment and then actual collection.
The jama was the amount assessed, as opposed to
hasil, the amount collected. In his list of duties of
the amil-guzar or revenue collector, Akbar decreed
that while he should strive to make cultivators pay
in cash, the option of payment in kind was also to
be kept open. While fixing revenue, the attempt of
the state was to maximise its claims. The scope of
actually realising these claims was, however,
sometimes thwarted by local conditions.

Both cultivated and cultivable lands were measured
in each province. The Ain compiled the aggregates of
such lands during Akbar’s rule. Efforts to measure
lands continued under subsequent emperors. For
instance, in 1665, Aurangzeb expressly instructed his
revenue officials to prepare annual records of the
number of cultivators in each village (Source 7). Yet
not all areas were measured successfully. As we have
seen, forests covered huge areas of the subcontinent
and thus remained unmeasured.

Rationalised 2023-24

213

> Discuss...

The zamindari system was
abolished in India after
Independence. Read through
this section and identify
reasons why this was done.
214

Aminwas an official responsible
for ensuring that imperial
regulations were carried out in
the provinces.

> What principles did the
Mughal state follow while
classifying lands in its territories?
How was revenue assessed?

Map 1
The expansion of the Mughal Empire

r

> What impact do you think
the expansion of the empire
would have had on land revenue
collection?

The mansabdari system

The Mughal administrative
system had at its apex a military-
cum-bureaucratic apparatus
(mansabdari) which was
responsible for looking after the
civil and military affairs of the
state. Some mansabdars were
paid in cash (naqdi), while the
majority of them were paid
through assignments of revenue
(jagirs) in different regions of the
empire. They were transferred
periodically. See also Chapter 9.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Source 5

Classification of lands under Akbar

The following is a listing of criteria of classification excerpted
from the Ain:

The Emperor Akbar in his profound sagacity classified
the lands and fixed a different revenue to be paid by
each. Polaj is land which is annually cultivated for each
crop in succession and is never allowed to lie fallow.
Parauti is land left out of cultivation for a time that it
may recover its strength. Chachar is land that has
lain fallow for three or four years. Banjar is land
uncultivated for five years and more. Of the first two
kinds of land, there are three classes, good, middling,
and bad. They add together the produce of each sort,
and the third of this represents the medium produce,
one-third part of which is exacted as the Royal dues.

Samarqand

feng Babur’s reign, 1530
= Akbar's reign, 1605

+] Aurangzeb’s reign, 1707

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

Source 6

Cash or kind?

The Ain on land revenue collection:

Let him (the amil-guzar) not make it a practice of
taking only in cash but also in kind. The latter is
effected in several ways. First, kankut: in the Hindi
language kan signifies grain, and kut, estimates ... If
any doubts arise, the crops should be cut and
estimated in three lots, the good, the middling, and
the inferior, and the hesitation removed. Often, too,
the land taken by appraisement, gives a sufficiently
accurate return. Secondly, batai, also called bhaoili,
the crops are reaped and stacked and divided by
agreement in the presence of the parties. But in this
case several intelligent inspectors are required;
otherwise, the evil-minded and false are given to
deception. Thirdly, khet-batai, when they divide the
fields after they are sown. Fourthly, lang batai, after
cutting the grain, they form it in heaps and divide it
among themselves, and each takes his share home
and turns it to profit.
rm

> What difference would each of the systems

of assessment and collection of revenue have
| made to the cultivator?

> Discuss...
Would you consider the land revenue system of
the Mughals as a flexible one?

7. THE FLOW OF SILVER

The Mughal Empire was among the large territorial
empires in Asia that had managed to consolidate power
and resources during the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. These empires were the Ming (China),
Safavid (Iran) and Ottoman (Turkey). The political
stability achieved by all these empires helped create
vibrant networks of overland trade from China to the
Mediterranean Sea. Voyages of discovery and the
opening up of the New World resulted in a massive
expansion of Asia’s (particularly India’s) trade with

This
Aurangzeb’s order to his
revenue Official, 1665:

215

Source 7

is an excerpt from

He should direct the amins of
the parganas that they should
discover the actual conditions
of cultivation (maujudat),
village by village, peasant-wise
(asamiwar), and after minute
scrutiny, assess the jama,
Keeping in view the financial
interests (kifayat) of the
government, and the welfare
of the peasantry.

r

> Why do you think
the emperor insisted
) on a detailed survey?

Fig. 8.11
A silver rupya issued by Akbar
(obverse and reverse)

Europe. This resulted in a greater geographical
diversity of India’s overseas trade as well as an

Rationalised 2023-24
Fig. 8.12
A silver rupya issued by Aurangzeb

Fig. 8.13

An example of textiles produced in
the subcontinent to meet the
demands of European markets

> Discuss...

Find out whether there are
any taxes on agricultural
production at present in
your state. Explain the
similarities and differences
between Mughal fiscal
policies and those adopted
by present-day state
governments.

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

expansion in the commodity composition of this trade.
An expanding trade brought in huge amounts of silver
bullion into Asia to pay for goods procured from India,
and a large part of that bullion gravitated towards
India. This was good for India as it did not have
natural resources of silver. As a result, the period
between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries was
also marked by a remarkable stability in the
availability of metal currency, particularly the silver
rupya in India. This facilitated an unprecedented
expansion of minting of coins and the circulation of
money in the economy as well as the ability of the
Mughal state to extract taxes and revenue in cash.
The testimony of an Italian traveller, Giovanni
Careri, who passed through India c. 1690, provides
a graphic account about the way silver travelled
across the globe to reach India. It also gives us an idea
of the phenomenal amounts of cash and commodity
transactions in seventeenth-century India.

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

Source 8

How silver came to India

This excerpt from Giovanni Careri’s account (based on Bernier’s account) gives an
idea of the enormous amount of wealth that found its way into the Mughal Empire:

That the Reader may form some idea of the Wealth of this (Mughal) Empire, he is to
observe that all the Gold and Silver, which circulates throughout the World at last
Centres here. It is well known that as much of it comes out of America, after running
through several Kingdoms of Europe, goes partly into Turky (Turkey), for several
sorts of Commodities; and part into Persia, by the way of Smirna for Silk. Now the
Turks not being able to abstain from Coffee, which comes from Hyeman (Oman),
and Arabia ... nor Persia, Arabia, and the Turks themselves to go without the
commodities of India, send vast quantities of Mony (money) to Moka (Mocha) on
the Red Sea, near Babel Mandel; to Bassora (Basra) at the bottom of the Persian
Gulgh (Gulf); ... which is afterwards sent over in Ships to Indostan (Hindustan).
Besides the Indian, Dutch, English, and Portuguese Ships, that every Year carry the
Commodities of Indostan, to Pegu, Tanasserri (parts of Myanmar), Siam (Thailand),
Ceylon (Sri Lanka) ... the Maldive Islands, Mozambique and other Places, must of
necessity convey much Gold and Silver thither, from those Countries. All that the
Dutch fetch from the Mines in Japan, sooner or later, goes to Indostan; and the
goods carry’d hence into Europe, whether to France, England, or Portugal, are all
purchas’d for ready Mony, which remains there.

8. THE AIN-I AKBARI OF ABU’L
FAZL ALLAMI

The Ain-i Akbari was the culmination of a large
historical, administrative project of classification
undertaken by Abul Fazl at the order of Emperor
Akbar. It was completed in 1598, the forty-second
regnal year of the emperor, after having gone through
five revisions. The Ain was part of a larger project
of history writing commissioned by Akbar. This
history, known as the Akbar Nama, comprised three
books. The first two provided a historical narrative.
We will look at these parts more closely in Chapter
9. The Ain-i Akbari, the third book, was organised
as a compendium of imperial regulations and a
gazetteer of the empire.

The Ain gives detailed accounts of the organisation
of the court, administration and army, the sources
of revenue and the physical layout of the provinces
of Akbar’s empire and the literary, cultural and
religious traditions of the people. Along with a
description of the various departments of Akbar’s
government and elaborate descriptions of the

Rationalised 2023-24
Fig. 8.14

Abu’l Fazl presenting the
manuscript of the completed
Akbar Nama to his patron

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

various provinces (subas) of the empire, the Ain
gives us intricate quantitative information of
those provinces.

Collecting and compiling this information
systematically was an important imperial exercise.
It informed the emperor about the varied and diverse
customs and practices prevailing across his
extensive territories. The Ain is therefore a mine of
information for us about the Mughal Empire during
Akbar’s reign. It is important, however, to keep in
mind that this is a view of the regions from the
centre, a view of society from its apex.

The Ain is made up of five books (daftars), of which
the first three books describe the administration.
The first book, called manzil-abadi, concerns the
imperial household and its maintenance. The second
book, sipah-abadi, covers the military and civil
administration and the establishment of servants.
This book includes notices and short biographical
sketches of imperial officials (mansabdars), learned
men, poets and artists.

The third book, mulk-abadi, is the one which deals
with the fiscal side of the empire and provides rich
quantitative information on revenue rates, followed
by the “Account of the Twelve Provinces”. This section
has detailed statistical information, which includes
the geographic, topographic and economic profile of
all subas and their administrative and fiscal
divisions (sarkars, parganas and mahals), total
measured area, and assessed revenue (jama).

After setting out details at the suba level, the Ain
goes on to give a detailed picture of the sarkars below
the suba. This it does in the form of tables, which
have eight columns giving the following information:
(1) parganat/mahal; (2) qila (forts); (83) arazi and
zamin-i paimuda (measured area); (4) naqdi, revenue
assessed in cash; (5) suyurghal, grants of revenue in
charity; (6) zamindars; columns 7 and 8 contain
details of the castes of these zamindars, and their
troops including their horsemen (sawar), foot-soldiers
(piyada) and elephants (fil). The mulk-abadi gives a
fascinating, detailed and highly complex view of
agrarian society in northern India. The fourth and
fifth books (daftars) deal with the religious, literary
and cultural traditions of the people of India and also
contain a collection of Akbar’s “auspicious sayings”.

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

Source 9

“Moistening the rose garden of fortune”

In this extract Abu'l Fazl gives a vivid account of how and from whom he
collected his information:

... to Abu’l Fazl, son of Mubarak ... this sublime mandate was given.
“Write with the pen of sincerity the account of the glorious events
and of our dominion-conquering victories ... Assuredly, I spent much
labour and research in collecting the records and narratives of His
Majesty’s actions and I was a long time interrogating the servants of
the State and the old members of the illustrious family. I examined
both prudent, truth-speaking old men and active-minded, right-
actioned young ones and reduced their statements to writing. The
Royal commands were issued to the provinces, that those who from
old service remembered, with certainty or with adminicle of doubt,
the events of the past, should copy out the notes and memoranda
and transit them to the court. (Then) a second command shone forth i"
from the holy Presence-chamber; to wit - that the materials which

had been collected should be ... recited in the royal hearing, and
whatever might have to be written down afterwards, should be
introduced into the noble volume as a supplement, and that such
details as on account of the minuteness of the inquiries and the
minutae of affairs, @which) could not then be brought to an end,
should be inserted afterwards at my leisure.

Being relieved by this royal order — the interpreter of the Divine
ordinance — from the secret anxiety of my heart, I proceeded to
reduce into writing the rough draughts (drafts)which were void of
the grace of arrangement and style. I obtained the chronicle of
events beginning at the Nineteenth Year of the Divine Era, when
the Record Office was established by the enlightened intellect of
His Majesty, and from its rich pages, I gathered the accounts of
many events. Great pains too, were taken to procure the originals
or copies of most of the orders which had been issued to the
provinces from the Accession up to the present-day ... I also took
much trouble to incorporate many of the reports which ministers
and high officials had submitted, about the affairs of the empire
and the events of foreign countries. And my labour-loving soul
was satiated by the apparatus of inquiry and research. | also exerted
myself energetically to collect the rough notes and memoranda of
sagacious and well-informed men. By these means, I constructed a
reservoir for irrigating and moistening the rose garden of fortune
(the Akbar Nama).

|
work. Which of these sources would have been most useful |
for arriving at an understanding of agrarian relations? l
To what extent do you think his work would have been

é
| > List all the sources that Abu’l Fazl used to compile his
|
|
| influenced by his relationship with Akbar?

Rationalised 2023-24
220

Translating the Ain

Given the importance of the Ain,
it has been translated for use by
a number of scholars. Henry
Blochmann edited it and the
Asiatic Society of Bengal,
Calcutta (present-day Kolkata),
published it in its Bibliotheca
Indica series. The book has
also been translated into English
in three volumes. The standard
translation of Volume 1 is that
of Henry Blochmann (Calcutta
1873). The other two volumes
were translated by H.S. Jarrett
(Calcutta 1891 and 1894).

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

Although the Ain was officially sponsored to record
detailed information to facilitate Emperor Akbar
govern his empire, it was much more than a
reproduction of official papers. That the manuscript
was revised five times by the author would suggest
a high degree of caution on the part of Abul Fazl
and a search for authenticity. For instance, oral
testimonies were cross-checked and verified before
being incorporated as “facts” in the chronicle. In
the quantitative sections, all numeric data were
reproduced in words so as to minimise the chances
of subsequent transcriptional errors.

Historians who have carefully studied the Ain point
out that it is not without its problems. Numerous
errors in totalling have been detected. These are
ascribed to simple slips of arithmetic or of
transcription by Abu’l Fazl’s assistants. These are
generally minor and do not detract from the overall
quantitative veracity of the manuals.

Another limitation of the Ain is the somewhat
skewed nature of the quantitative data. Data were
not collected uniformly from all provinces. For
instance, while for many subas detailed information
was compiled about the caste composition of the
zamindars, such information is not available for
Bengal and Orissa. Further, while the fiscal data
from the subas is remarkable for its richness, some
equally vital parameters such as prices and wages
from these same areas are not as well documented.
The detailed list of prices and wages that the Ain
does provide is mainly derived from data pertaining
to areas in or around the imperial capital of Agra,
and is therefore of limited relevance for the rest of
the country.

These limitations notwithstanding, the Ain remains
an extraordinary document ofits times. By providing
fascinating glimpses into the structure and
organisation of the Mughal Empire and by giving us
quantitative information about its products and
people, Abu’l Fazl achieved a major breakthrough
in the tradition of medieval chroniclers who wrote
mostly about remarkable political events - wars,
conquests, political machinations, and dynastic
turmoil. Information about the country, its people

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

and its products was mentioned only incidentally
and as embellishments to the essentially political
thrust of the narrative.

The Ain completely departed from this tradition as
it recorded information about the empire and the people
of India, and thus constitutes a benchmark for
studying India at the turn of the seventeenth century.
The value of the Ain’s quantitative evidence is
uncontested where the study of agrarian relations
is concerned. But it is the information it contains on
people, their professions and trades and on the
imperial establishment and the grandees of the empire
which enables historians to reconstruct the social
fabric of India at that time.

221

f-

TIMELINE
LANDMARKS IN THE HISTORY OF THE MUGHAL EMPIRE

1526 Babur defeats Ibrahim Lodi, the Delhi Sultan,
at Panipat, becomes the first Mughal emperor
1530-40 First phase of Humayun’s reign
1540-55 Humayun defeated by Sher Shah,
in exile at the Safavid court
1555-56 Humayun regains lost territories
1556-1605 Reign of Akbar
1605-27 Reign of Jahangir
1628-58 Reign of Shah Jahan
1658-1707 Reign of Aurangzeb
1739 Nadir Shah invades India and sacks Delhi
1761 Ahmad Shah Abdali defeats the Marathas

in the third battle of Panipat

1765 The diwani of Bengal transferred to the
East India Company

1857 Last Mughal ruler, Bahadur Shah II,
deposed by the British and exiled to Rangoon
(present day Yangon, Myanmar)

Rationalised 2023-24
222

Fig. 8.15
A seventeenth-century painting
depicting jewellers

THEMES IN INDIAN History — Part 1

ANSWER IN100-150 WORDS

What are the problems in using the Ain as a source for
reconstructing agrarian history? How do historians deal
with this situation?

To what extent is it possible to characterise agricultural
production in the sixteenth-seventeenth centuries as
subsistence agriculture? Give reasons for your answer.

Describe the role played by women in agricultural
production.

Discuss, with examples, the significance of monetary
transactions during the period under consideration.

Examine the evidence that suggests that land revenue
was important for the Mughal fiscal system.

WRITE A SHORT ESSAY (ABOUT
250-300 WORDS)ON'THE FOLLOWING:

To what extent do you think caste was a factor in
influencing social and economic relations in agrarian

society?

How were the lives of forest dwellers transformed in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries?

Examine the role played by zamindars in Mughal India.

Discuss the ways in which panchayats and village
headmen regulated rural society.

Rationalised 2023-24
PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE

fa

10.

MAP WORK

On an outline map of the world, mark the areas
which had economic links with the Mughal Empire,
and trace out possible routes of communication.

11.

12.

PROJECT (CHOOSE ONE)

Visit a neighbouring village. Find out how many
people live there, which crops are grown, which
animals are raised, which artisanal groups reside
there, whether women own land, how the local
panchayat functions. Compare this information
with what you have learnt about the sixteenth-
seventeenth centuries, noting similarities and
differences. Explain both the changes and the
continuities that you find.

Select a small section of the Ain (10-12 pages,
available online at the website indicated below).
Read it carefully and prepare a report on how it
can be used by a historian.

Fig. 8.16
A painting depicting a woman selling sweets

Rationalised 2023-24

223

(W)

If you would like to know
more, read:

Sumit Guha. 1999.
Environment and Ethnicity
in India.

Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Irfan Habib. 1999.

The Agrarian System of Mughal
India 1556-1707 (Second edition).
Oxford University Press,

New Delhi.

W.H. Moreland. 1983 (rpt).
India at the Death of Akbar:
An Economic Study.
Oriental, New Delhi.

Tapan Raychaudhuri and
Irfan Habib (eds). 2004.

The Cambridge Economic
History of India. Vol.1.
Orient Longman, New Delhi.

Dietmar Rothermund. 1993.

An Economic History of India -
from Pre-colonial Times to 1991.
Routledge, London.

Sanjay Subrahmanyam (ed.).1994.
Money and the Market in India,
1100-1700.

Oxford University Press,

New Delhi.

For more information, ~
you could visit:

http://persian.packhum.org
persianindex.jsp?serv=
pi@file=00702053@ct=0
Credits for Illustrations

Theme 5
Fig. 5.1: Ritu Topa.
Fig. 5.2: Henri Stierlin, The Cultural History of the Arabs,
Aurum Press, London, 1981.
Fig. 5.4, 5.13: FICCI, Footprints of Enterprise: Indian Business
Through the Ages, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 1999.
Fig. 5.5: Calcutta Art Gallery, printed in E.B. Havell,
The Art Heritage of India, D.B. Taraporevala Sons & Co., Bombay, 1964.
Fig. 5.6, 5.7, 5.12: Bamber Gascoigne, The Great Moghuls,
Jonathan Cape Ltd., London, 1971.
Fig. 5.8, 5.9: Sunil Kumar.
Fig. 5.10: Rosemary Crill, Indian Ikat Textiles, Weatherhill, London, 1998.
Fig. 5.11, 5.14: C.A. Bayly (ed). An Illustrated History of Modern India,
1600-1947, Oxford University Press, Bombay, 1991.

Theme 6

Fig. 6.1: Susan L. Huntington, The Art of Ancient India,
Weatherhill, New York, 1993.

Fig. 6.3, 6.17: Jim Masselos, Jackie Menzies and Pratapaditya Pal,
Dancing to the Flute: Music and Dance in Indian Art,
The Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 1997.

Fig. 6.4, 6.5: Benjamin Rowland, The Art and Architecture of India,
Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1970.

Fig. 6.6: Henri Stierlin, The Cultural History of the Arabs,
Aurum Press, London, 1981.

Fig. 6.8: http://www.us.iis.ac.uk/view_article.asp/ContentID= 104228

Fig. 6.9: http://www.thekkepuram.ourfamily.com/miskal.htm

Fig. 6.10: http: //a-bangladesh.com/banglapedia/Images/A_0350A.JPG

Fig. 6.11: foziaqazi@kashmirvision.com

Fig. 6.12: Stuart Cary Welch, Indian Art and Culture 1300-1900,
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 1985.

Fig. 6.13: Bamber Gascoigne, The Great Moghuls,
Jonathan Cape Ltd., London, 1971.

Fig. 6.15: CCRT.

Fig. 6.16: C. A. Bayly (ed). An Illustrated History of Modern India,
1600-1947, Oxford University Press, Bombay, 1991.

Fig. 6.18: Anmad Nabi Khan, Islamic Architecture in Pakistan,
National Hijra Council, Islamabad, 1990.

Theme 7

Fig. 7.1, 7.11, 7.12, 7.14, 7.15, 7.16, 7.18: Vasundhara Filliozat and
George Michell (eds), The Splendours of Vijayanagara,
Marg Publications, Bombay, 1981.

Fig. 7.2: C.A. Bayly (ed). An Illustrated History of Modern India,
1600-1947, Oxford University Press, Bombay, 1991.
225

Fig. 7.3: Susan L. Huntington, The Art of Ancient India, Weatherhill,
New York, 1993.

Fig. 7.4, 7.6, 7.7, 7.20, 7. 23, 7.26, 7.27, 7.32: George Michell,
Architecture and Art of South India, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1995.

Fig. 7.5, 7.8, 7.9, 7.21 http://www.museum.upenn.edu/new/
research/Exp_Rese_Disc/Asia/vrp/HTML/Vijay_Hist.shtml

Fig 7.10: Catherine B. Asher and Cynthia Talbot.

India Before Europe, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2006.

Fig. 7.17, 7.22, 7.24, 7.28, 7.29, 7.30, 7.31, 7.33: George Michell and
M.B.Wagoner, Vijayanagara: Architectural Inventory of the
Sacred Centre, Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi.

Fig. 7.25: CCRT.

Theme 8

Fig. 8.1, 8.9: Milo Cleveland Beach and Ebba Koch, King of the World,
Sackler Gallery, New York, 1997.

Fig. 8.3: India Office Library, printed in C.A. Bailey (ed). An Illustrated
History of Modern India, 1600-1947, Oxford University Press,
Bombay, 1991.

Fig. 8.4: Harvard University Art Museum, printed in Stuart Cary Welch,
Indian Art and Culture 1300-1900, The Metropolitan Museum of Art,
New York, 1985.

Fig. 8.6, 8.11, 8.12, 8.14: C.A. Bayly (ed). An Illustrated History of Modern
India, 1600-1947, Oxford University Press, Bombay, 1991.

Fig. 8.13, 8.15: Bamber Gascoigne, The Great Moghuls,

Jonathan Cape Ltd., London, 1971.
Notes
