Testocekin Hadery
“ar Class All

co a tena
: ebran Steal Re a neat:
CONTENTS

HEME ONED Paleo obs egele prusthirere ae 1

BRICKS, BEADS AND BONES
The Harappan Civilisation

TUgepurs LWeys SS Ooh aio tot =I
KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

Early States and Economies

(c.600 BcE-600 cE)

THEME THREE ....++2+6+8+-93

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS
Early Societies
(c. 600 BcE-GO00 cE)

THEME Four ...........-82
THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS
Cultural Developments

(c. 600 BcE-GOO cE)

PART II*

THEME Five
THROUGH THE EYES OF TRAVELLERS:

Perceptions of Society
(c. tenth to seventeenth centuries)

THEME SIx

BHAKTI—SUFI TRADITIONS:

Changes in Religious Beliefs and Devotional Texts
(c. eighth to eighteenth centuries)
THEME SEVEN

AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA
(c. fourteenth to sixteenth centuries)

THEME EIGHT

PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE:
Agrarian Society and the Mughal Empire
(c. sixteenth-seventeenth centuries)

THEME NINE

KINGS AND CHRONICLES:

The Mughal Courts

(c. sixteenth-seventeenth centuries)

THEME TEN

COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE:
Exploring Official Archives

THEME ELEVEN
REBELS AND THE RAJ:
1857 Revolt and its Representations

THEME TWELVE

COLONIAL CITIES:
Urbanisation, Planning and Architecture

THEME THIRTEEN

_ MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE
NATIONALIST MOVEMENT:
Civil Disobedience and Beyond

THEME FOURTEEN

UNDERSTANDING PARTITION:
Politics, Memories, Experiences

THEME FIFTEEN

FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION:
The Beginning of a New Era

*Parts I and Il will follow

THEME BRICKS, BEADS AND BONES
ONE THE HARAPPAN CIVILISATION

The Harappan seal (Fig.1.1) is possibly the most
distinctive artefact of the Harappan or Indus valley
civilisation. Made of a stone called steatite, seals
like this one often contain animal motifs and signs
from a script that remains undeciphered. Yet we
know a great deal about the lives of the people who
lived in the region from what they left behind -
their houses, pots, ornaments, tools and seals — in
other words, from archaeological evidence. Let us
see what we know about the Harappan civilisation,
and how we know about it. We will explore how
archaeological material is interpreted and how
interpretations sometimes change. Of course, there Fig. 1.1

are some aspects of the civilisation that are as yet Al nlereRean Sea
unknown and may even remain so.

Terms, places, times

The Indus valley civilisation is also called the Harappan culture.
Archaeologists use the term “culture” for a group of objects,
distinctive in style, that are usually found together within a specific
geographical area and period of time. In the case of the Harappan
culture, these distinctive objects include seals, beads, weights, stone
blades (Fig. 2.2) and even baked bricks. These objects were found
from areas as far apart as Afghanistan, Jammu, Baluchistan (Pakistan)
and Gujarat (Map 1).

Named after Harappa, the first site where this unique culture was
discovered (p. 6), the civilisation is dated between c. 2600 and

1900 sce. There were earlier and later cultures, often called Early
Harappan and Late Harappan, in the same area. The Harappan
civilisation is sometimes called the Mature Harappan culture to
distinguish it from these cultures.

Fig. 1.2
Beads, weights, blades

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

t
You will find certain ae
abbreviations, related to 3 t
dates, in this book. ee

BP stands for Before ai i shto
Present As 2

e
BCE stands for Before |~”
Common Era
CE stands for the Common
Era. The present year is
2007 according to this
dating system.

Map 1

ec. stands for the Latin
word circa and means
“approximate.”

Arabian Sea

Some important
Mature Harappan sites
Sketch map not to scale

‘
‘
Nate,
cen
ne
Harapp
arappa
a) 7 Rakhigarhi
Cee e
ase Bare vali
c) ‘'S *Mitathal 9
‘~“Kalibangan 43
. o ee 3%
ss earcaert we
< * Ganweriwala eS
J Ns 3
char af 7
fie
Mohenjodaroe aKot-Diji
e a %
. Shy s :
‘ f
AMS * Chanfudaro / o
_( Balakot Sosy
H
e - \ 7
t s
oe yt
"Dhofavita * & g
ao
. Lothal
os?
®™ Nageshwar Rangpur ga
- art

f Early and Mature )

Harappan cultures

Look at these figures for the
number of settlements in Sind
and Cholistan (the desert area
of Pakistan bordering the Thar
Desert).

SIND CHOLISTAN

Total number 106 239
of sites

Early Harappan 52 37
sites

Mature 65 136
Harappan sites

Mature Harappan 43 132
settlements on

new sites

Early Harappan 29 33

sites abandoned

1. BEGINNINGS

There were several archaeological cultures in the
region prior to the Mature Harappan. These cultures
were associated with distinctive pottery, evidence of
agriculture and pastoralism, and some crafts.
Settlements were generally small, and there were
virtually no large buildings. It appears that there
was a break between the Early Harappan and the
Harappan civilisation, evident from large-scale
burning at some sites, as well as the abandonment
of certain settlements.

2. SUBSISTENCE STRATEGIES

If you look at Maps 1 and 2 you will notice that the
Mature Harappan culture developed in some of the
areas occupied by the Early Harappan cultures.
These cultures also shared certain common elements
including subsistence strategies. The Harappans ate
a wide range of plant and animal products, including
fish. Archaeologists have been able to reconstruct
dietary practices from finds of charred grains and
seeds. These are studied by archaeo-botanists, who
are specialists in ancient plant remains. Grains

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES 3

found at Harappan sites include
wheat, barley, lentil, chickpea
and sesame. Millets are found
from sites in Gujarat. Finds of ‘ “f J
rice are relatively rare. = sa mee
Animal bones found at Harappan er
sites include those of cattle, sheep, - a
goat, buffalo and pig. Studies ¢ eA “a ey ie a
done by archaeo-zoologists or zoo- a ‘DAMB "2 * g ‘ ~ SISWAL
archaeologists indicate that these ~~ SADAAT HB | oe ey
animals were domesticated. ot poets piso ee ‘7
Bones of wild species such as eet OY ee =
boar, deer and gharial are ~~ pt
also found. We do not know AMRI-NAL® te /#
whether the Harappans hunted Brier bi 2 ‘
these animals themselves or a ea a el

obtained meat from other hunting Arabian Sea } ‘ ag
communities. Bones of fish and , a

fowl are also found.

to

Map 2 :
2.1 Agricultural technologies oecupaton Harappan..
While the prevalence of
agriculture is indicated by finds
of grain, it is more difficult to
reconstruct actual agricultural practices. Were

seeds broadcast (scattered) on ploughed lands?

Representations on seals and terracotta sculpture

indicate that the bull was known, and

archaeologists extrapolate from this that oxen Fig. 1.3

were used for ploughing. Moreover, terracotta A terracotta bull
models of the plough have been found at sites in
Cholistan and at Banawali (Haryana).
Archaeologists have also found evidence of a
ploughed field at Kalibangan (Rajasthan),
associated with Early Harappan levels (see p. 20).
The field had two sets of furrows at right angles to
each other, suggesting that two different crops
were grown together.

Archaeologists have also tried to identify the
tools used for harvesting. Did the Harappans use
stone blades set in wooden handles or did they use
metal tools? ;

Most Harappan sites are located in semi-arid ~ Discuss...
lands, where irrigation was probably required for Are there any similarities or
agriculture. Traces of canals have been found at differences in the distribution
the Harappan site of Shortughai in Afghanistan, but of settlements shown on Maps
not in Punjab or Sind. It is possible that ancient 1 and 2?

Sketch map not to scale

4 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

canals silted up long ago. It is also likely that water
drawn from wells was used for irrigation. Besides,
water reservoirs found in Dholavira (Gujarat) may
have been used to store water for agriculture.

Source 1

How artefacts are identified

Processing of food required grinding equipment as well
as vessels for mixing, blending and cooking. These were

Fig. 1.4 made of stone, metal and terracotta. This is an excerpt
Copper tools from one of the earliest reports on excavations at
CT 7 Mohenjodaro, the best-known Harappan site:

> Do you think these
tools could have been used Saddle querns ... are found in considerable numbers
| for harvesting? | ... and they seem to have been the only means in use
L for grinding cereals. As a rule, they were roughly made
of hard, gritty, igneous rock or sandstone and mostly
show signs of hard usage. As their bases are usually
convex, they must have been set in the earth or in
Fig. 1.5 mud to prevent their rocking. Two main types have
Reservoir at Dholavira been found: those on which another smaller stone was
Note the masonry work. pushed or rolled to and fro, and others with which a
A second stone was used as a pounder, eventually making
a large cavity in the nether stone. Querns of the former
type were probably used solely for grain; the second
type possibly only for pounding herbs and spices for
making curries. In fact, stones of this latter type are
dubbed “curry stones” by our workmen and our cook
asked for the loan of one from the museum for use in
the kitchen.

From Ernest MAcKAY, Further Excavations at
Mohenjodaro, 1937.

| > Archaeologists use present-day analogies to try |

~ Discuss... and understand what ancient artefacts were used
What is the evidence used by for. Mackay was comparing present-day querns
archaeologists to reconstruct with what he found. Is this a useful strategy?

dietary practices?

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES

3. MOHENJODARO

A PLANNED URBAN CENTRE
Perhaps the most unique feature of the Harappan
civilisation was the development of urban centres.
Let us look at one such centre, Mohenjodaro,
more closely. Although Mohenjodaro is the most Fig. 1.7
well-known site, the first site to be discovered Layout of Mohenjodaro
was Harappa. ;
The settlement is divided into two sections, one _ | 2 Hoar us inte ILENE Lown
smaller but higher and the other much larger but Pe 7

The plight of Harappa

Although Harappa was the
first site to be discovered, it
was badly destroyed by brick
robbers. As early as 1875,
Alexander Cunningham, the
first Director-General of the
Archaeological Survey of
India (ASI), often called the
father of Indian archaeology,
noted that the amount
of brick taken from the
ancient site was enough
to lay bricks for “about
100 miles” of the railway
line between Lahore and
Multan. Thus, many of the
ancient structures at the site
were damaged. In contrast,
Mohenjodaro was far better
preserved.

Fig. 1.8
A drain in Mohenjodaro
Notice the huge opening of the

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

lower. Archaeologists designate these as the Citadel
and the Lower Town respectively. The Citadel owes
its height to the fact that buildings were constructed
on mud brick platforms. It was walled, which
meant that it was physically separated from the
Lower Town.

The Lower Town was also walled. Several buildings
were built on platforms, which served as foundations.
It has been calculated that if one labourer moved
roughly a cubic metre of earth daily, just to put the
foundations in place it would have required four
million person-days, in other words, mobilising
labour on a very large scale.

Consider something else. Once the platforms were
in place, all building activity within the city was
restricted to a fixed area on the platforms. So it
seems that the settlement was first planned and
then implemented accordingly. Other signs of
planning include bricks, which, whether sun-dried
or baked, were of a standardised ratio, where the
length and breadth were four times and twice the
height respectively. Such bricks were used at all
Harappan settlements.

3.1 Laying out drains

One of the most distinctive features of Harappan
cities was the carefully planned drainage system. If
you look at the plan of the Lower Town you will notice
that roads and streets were laid out along an
approximate “grid” pattern, intersecting at right
angles. It seems that streets with drains were laid
out first and then houses built along them. If
domestic waste water had to flow into the street
drains, every house needed to have at least one wall
along a street.

Citadels

While most Harappan settlements have a small high
western part and a larger lower eastern section, there are
variations. At sites such as Dholavira and Lothal (Gujarat),
the entire settlement was fortified, and sections within the
town were also separated by walls. The Citadel within
Lothal was not walled off, but was built at a height.

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES

3.2 Domestic architecture

The Lower Town at Mohenjodaro provides examples
of residential buildings. Many were centred on a
courtyard, with rooms on all sides. The courtyard
was probably the centre of activities such as cooking
and weaving, particularly during hot and dry
weather. What is also interesting is an apparent
concern for privacy: there are no windows in the
walls along the ground level. Besides, the main
entrance does not give a direct view of the interior
or the courtyard.

Every house had its own bathroom paved with
bricks, with drains connected through the wall to
the street drains. Some houses have remains of
staircases to reach a second storey or the roof. Many
houses had wells, often in a room that could be
reached from the outside and perhaps used by
passers-by. Scholars have estimated that the total
number of wells in Mohenjodaro was about 700.

-
04 imeters |
a 5 40 20 feet |

ee —---—4

| 2D Where is the courtyard? Where are the two |
| staircases? What is the entrance to the house like? |

Source 2

The most ancient
system yet discovered

About the drains, Mackay
noted: “It is certainly the most
complete ancient system as yet
discovered.” Every house was
connected to the street drains.
The main channels were made
of bricks set in mortar and were
covered with loose bricks that
could be removed for cleaning.
In some cases, limestone was
used for the covers. House
drains first emptied into a sump
or cesspit into which solid
matter settled while waste water
flowed out into the street drains.
Very long drainage channels
were provided at intervals with
sumps for cleaning. It is a
wonder of archaeology that
“little heaps of material, mostly
sand, have frequently been
found lying alongside drainage
channels, which shows ... that
the debris was not always
carted away when the drain
was cleared”.

From Ernest MACKAY, Early Indus
Civilisatim, 1948.

Drainage systems were not
unique to the larger cities,
but were found in smaller
settlements as well. At Lothal
for example, while houses were
built of mud bricks, drains were
made of burnt bricks.

Fig. 1.9

This is an isometric drawing of a
large house in Mohenjodaro.
There was a well in room no 6.

\ eal
| a 2)
|Wheéler’s deap”/
wf trench

ip jer Great Bat

Main Street

r
=

Jansen's

‘.
aay

NH

Sars
~~

—™,
7

Dikshit's Trench F

/

Retaining Walls
Sr

oo
fs
get

wale
Fed

ein

, i

a

Fig. 1.10
Plan of the Citadel

excavated well o

~ Discuss...

Which of the architectural
features of Mohenjodaro
indicate planning?

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

3.3 The Citadel
It is on the Citadel that we
find evidence of structures
that were probably used for
special public purposes.
These include the warehouse
-— a massive structure of
which the lower brick
portions remain, while the
upper portions, probably
of wood, decayed long
ago — and the Great Bath.
The Great Bath was a
large rectangular tank in a
courtyard surrounded by a
corridor on all four sides.
There were two flights of
steps on the north and
south leading into the tank,
which was made watertight
by setting bricks on edge
and using a mortar of
gypsum. There were rooms
on three sides, in one of
which was a large well.
Water from the tank flowed
into a huge drain. Across a
lane to the north lay a
smaller building with
eight bathrooms, four on
each side of a corridor,
with drains from each
bathroom connecting to a
drain that ran along the
corridor. The uniqueness of
the structure, as well as
the context in which it
was found (the Citadel,
with several distinctive
buildings), has led scholars
to suggest that it was meant for some kind of a special
ritual bath.

| D Are there other structures on the Citadel apart from |
| the warehouse and the Great Bath? |

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES

4. TRACKING SOCIAL DIFFERENCES

4.1 Burials

Archaeologists generally use certain strategies to
find out whether there were social or economic
differences amongst people living within a particular
culture. These include studying burials. You are
probably familiar with the massive pyramids of
Egypt, some of which were contemporaneous with
the Harappan civilisation. Many of these pyramids
were royal burials, where enormous quantities of
wealth was buried.

At burials in Harappan sites the dead were
generally laid in pits. Sometimes, there were
differences in the way the burial pit was made - in
some instances, the hollowed-out spaces were lined
with bricks. Could these variations be an indication
of social differences? We are not sure.

Some graves contain pottery and ornaments,
perhaps indicating a belief that these could be used
in the afterlife. Jewellery has been found in burials
of both men and women. In fact, in the excavations
at the cemetery in Harappa in the mid-1980s, an
ornament consisting of three shell rings, a jasper
(a kind of semi-precious stone) bead and hundreds
of micro beads was found near the skull of a male.
In some instances the dead were buried with copper
mirrors. But on the whole, it appears that the
Harappans did not believe in burying precious things
with the dead.

4.2 Looking for “luxuries”
Another strategy to identify social differences is to
study artefacts, which archaeologists broadly
classify as utilitarian and luxuries. The first category
includes objects of daily use made fairly easily out
of ordinary materials such as stone or clay. These
include querns, pottery, needles, flesh-rubbers (body
scrubbers), ete., and are usually found distributed
throughout settlements. Archaeologists assume
objects were luxuries if they are rare or made from
costly, non-local materials or with complicated
technologies. Thus, little pots of faience (a material
made of ground sand or silica mixed with colour
and a gum and then fired) were probably considered
precious because they were difficult to make.

The situation becomes more complicated
when we find what seem to be articles of daily

Fig. 1.11
A copper mirror

Fig. 1.12
A faience pot

10

Hoards are objects kept
carefully by people, often inside
containers such as pots. Such
hoards can be of jewellery or
metal objects saved for reuse
by metalworkers. If for some
reason the original owners do
not retrieve them, they remain
where they are left till some
archaeologist finds them.

> Discuss...

What are the modes of
disposal of the dead prevalent
at present? To what extent do
these represent social
differences?

Fig. 1.13
A tool and beads

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

use, such as spindle whorls made of rare materials
such as faience. Do we classify these as utilitarian
or luxuries?

If we study the distribution of such artefacts, we
find that rare objects made of valuable materials
are generally concentrated in large settlements like
Mohenjodaro and Harappa and are rarely found in
the smaller settlements. For example, miniature pots
of faience, perhaps used as perfume bottles, are found
mostly in Mohenjodaro and Harappa, and there are
none from small settlements like Kalibangan. Gold
too was rare, and as at present, probably precious —-
all the gold jewellery found at Harappan sites was
recovered from hoards.

5. FINDING OUT ABOUT CRAFT

PRODUCTION

Locate Chanhudaro on Map 1. This is a tiny
settlement (less than 7 hectares) as compared to
Mohenjodaro (125 hectares), almost exclusively
devoted to craft production, including bead-making,
shell-cutting, metal-working, seal-making and
weight-making.

The variety of materials used to make beads is
remarkable: stones like carnelian (of a beautiful red
colour), jasper, crystal, quartz and steatite; metals
like copper, bronze and gold; and shell, faience and
terracotta or burnt clay. Some beads were made of
two or more stones, cemented together, some of stone
with gold caps. The shapes were numerous - disc-
shaped, cylindrical, spherical, barrel-shaped,
segmented. Some were decorated by incising or
painting, and some had designs etched onto them.

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES

Techniques for making beads differed according
to the material. Steatite, a very soft stone, was easily
worked. Some beads were moulded out of a paste
made with steatite powder. This permitted making a
variety of shapes, unlike the geometrical forms made
out of harder stones. How the steatite micro bead
was made remains a puzzle for archaeologists
studying ancient technology.

Archaeologists’ experiments have revealed that the
red colour of carnelian was obtained by firing the
yellowish raw material and beads at various stages
of production. Nodules were chipped into rough
shapes, and then finely flaked into the final form.
Grinding, polishing and drilling completed the
process. Specialised drills have been found at
Chanhudaro, Lothal and more recently at Dholavira.

If you locate Nageshwar and Balakot on Map 1,
you will notice that both settlements are near the
coast. These were specialised centres for making
shell objects - including bangles, ladles and
inlay - which were taken to other settlements.
Similarly, it is likely that finished products (such
as beads) from Chanhudaro and Lothal were taken
to the large urban centres such as Mohenjodaro
and Harappa.

5.1 Identifying centres
of production

In order to identify centres
of craft production,
archaeologists usually look
for the following: raw
material such as stone
nodules, whole shells, copper
ore; tools; unfinished
objects; rejects and waste
material. In fact, waste is
one of the best indicators
of craft work. For instance,
if shell or stone is cut to
make objects, then pieces
of these materials will be
discarded as waste at the
place of production.

Fig. 1.15
A terracotta figurine

11

Fig. 1.14

Pottery

Some of these can be seen in the
National Museum, Delhi or in the
site museum at Lothal.

~ Discuss...

Should the stone artefacts
illustrated in the chapter be
considered as utilitarian
objects or as luxuries? Are
there any that may fall into
both categories?

12

Fig.1.16
Copper and bronze vessels

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Sometimes, larger waste pieces were used up to
make smaller objects, but minuscule bits were
usually left in the work area. These traces suggest
that apart from small, specialised centres, craft
production was also undertaken in large cities such
as Mohenjodaro and Harappa.

6. STRATEGIES FOR PROCURING
MATERIALS

As is obvious, a variety of materials was used for
craft production. While some such as clay were
locally available, many such as stone, timber and
metal had to be procured from outside the alluvial
plain. Terracotta toy models of bullock carts suggest
that this was one important means of transporting
goods and people across land routes. Riverine routes
along the Indus and its tributaries, as well as coastal
routes were also probably used.

6.1 Materials from the subcontinent and beyond

The Harappans procured materials for craft
production in various ways. For instance, they
established settlements such as Nageshwar and
Balakot in areas where shell was available. Other
such sites were Shortughai, in far-off Afghanistan,
near the best source of lapis lazuli, a blue stone
that was apparently very highly valued, and Lothal
which was near sources of carnelian (from Bharuch
in Gujarat), steatite (from south Rajasthan and north
Gujarat) and metal (from Rajasthan).

Another strategy for procuring raw materials may
have been to send expeditions to areas such as the
Khetri region of Rajasthan (for copper) and south
India (for gold). These expeditions established
communication with local communities. Occasional
finds of Harappan artefacts such as steatite micro
beads in these areas are indications of such contact.
There is evidence in the Khetri area for what
archaeologists call the Ganeshwar-Jodhpura culture,
with its distinctive non-Harappan pottery and
an unusual wealth of copper objects. It is possible
that the inhabitants of this region supplied copper
to the Harappans.

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES

13

Map 3

fi Caspian ; - ve
Mediterranean Sea Altyn Depe y
Sea ‘es
MESOPOTAMIA
é TURAN
‘\@ Uruk a ‘
ur .  w. Shahr i Sokhta @ a
‘ae % bared ie a.
Harappa
ee ae i : ns oa ‘
oe Tepe Yahyae
wh ¢
f MELUHHA
DILMUN ae
ee Sutkagendor
re 4
Reda, MAGAN Lothal
Sea s

@Rasal’ Janayz

The Harappan Civilisation and West Asia

Sketch map not to scale

Arabian Sea

6.2 Contact with distant lands
Recent archaeological finds suggest that copper was
also probably brought from Oman, on the south-
eastern tip of the Arabian peninsula. Chemical
analyses have shown that both the Omani copper
and Harappan artefacts have traces of nickel,
suggesting a common origin. There are other traces
of contact as well. A distinctive type of vessel, a
large Harappan jar coated with a thick layer of black
clay has been found at Omani sites. Such thick
coatings prevent the percolation of liquids. We do
not know what was carried in these vessels, but it
is possible that the Harappans exchanged the
contents of these vessels for Omani copper.
Mesopotamian texts datable to the third
millennium sce refer to copper coming from
a region called Magan, perhaps a name for
Oman, and interestingly enough copper found at

Fig. 1.17
A Harappan jar found in Oman

14 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Mesopotamian sites also
contains traces of nickel.
Other archaeological
finds suggestive of long-
distance contacts include
Harappan seals, weights,
dice and beads. In this
context, it is worth noting
that Mesopotamian texts
Fig. 1.18 mention contact with regions named Dilmun
This is a cylinder seal, typical of (probably the island of Bahrain), Magan and
Mesopotamia, but the humped bull Meluhha, possibly the Harappan region. They
motif on it appears to be derived mention the products from Meluhha: carnelian,
from the Indus region. lapis | i ld d
pis lazuli, copper, gold, and varieties of wood.
A Mesopotamian myth says of Meluhha: “May your
bird be the haja-bird, may its call be heard in
the royal palace.” Some archaeologists think the
haja-bird was the peacock. Did it get this name
from its call? It is likely that
communication with Oman,
Bahrain or Mesopotamia was
by sea. Mesopotamian texts
refer to Meluhha as a
land of seafarers. Besides,
we find depictions of ships
and boats on seals.

Fig. 1.19
The round “Persian Gulf” seal found
in Bahrain sometimes carries
Harappan motifs. Interestingly,
local “Dilmun” weights followed
the Harappan standard.

Fig. 1.20
Seal depicting a boat

> Discuss...
What were the possible routes
from the Harappan region to
Oman, Dilmun and
Mesopotamia?

Bricks, BEADS AND BoNES

15

r

YVOA® BO

7. SEALS, SCRIPT, WEIGHTS

7.1 Seals and sealings

Seals and sealings were used to facilitate long-
distance communication. Imagine a bag of goods
being sent from one place to another. Its mouth was
tied with rope and on the knot was affixed some wet
clay on which one or more seals were pressed,
leaving an impression. If the bag reached with
its sealing intact, it meant that it had not been
tampered with. The sealing also conveyed the identity
of the sender.

7.2 An enigmatic script

Harappan seals usually have a line of writing,
probably containing the name and title of the owner.
Scholars have also suggested that the motif
(generally an animal) conveyed a meaning to those
who could not read.

Most inscriptions are short, the longest containing
about 26 signs. Although the script remains
undeciphered to date, it was evidently not
alphabetical (where each sign stands for a vowel or
a consonant) as it has just too many signs -
somewhere between 375 and 400. It is apparent that
the script was written from right to left as some
seals show a wider spacing on the right and cramping
on the left, as if the engraver began working from
the right and then ran out of space.

Consider the variety of objects on which writing
has been found: seals, copper tools, rims of jars,
copper and terracotta tablets, jewellery, bone rods,
even an ancient signboard! Remember, there may
have been writing on perishable materials too. Could
this mean that literacy was widespread?

7.3 Weights

Exchanges were regulated by a precise system of
weights, usually made of a stone called chert and
generally cubical (Fig. 1.2), with no markings. The

Fig. 1.21
Letters on an ancient signboard

Fig. 1.22
A sealing from Ropar

rT TTT TT TTT |
> How many seals are

impressed on this piece of clay?

~ Discuss...

What are some of the present-
day methods used for long-
distance exchange of goods?
What are their advantages
and problems?

16

Fig. 1.23
A “priest-king”

> Discuss...

Could everybody in Harappan
society have been equal?

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

lower denominations of weights were binary (1, 2, 4,
8, 16, 32, etc. up to 12,800), while the higher
denominations followed the decimal system. The
smaller weights were probably used for weighing
jewellery and beads. Metal scale-pans have also
been found.

8. ANCIENT AUTHORITY

There are indications of complex decisions being
taken and implemented in Harappan society. Take
for instance, the extraordinary uniformity of
Harappan artefacts as evident in pottery (Fig. 1.14),
seals, weights and bricks. Notably, bricks, though
obviously not produced in any single centre, were of
a uniform ratio throughout the region, from Jammu
to Gujarat. We have also seen that settlements were
strategically set up in specific locations for various
reasons. Besides, labour was mobilised for making
bricks and for the construction of massive walls
and platforms.
Who organised these activities?

8.1 Palaces and kings

If we look for a centre of power or for depictions of
people in power, archaeological records provide no
immediate answers. A large building found at
Mohenjodaro was labelled as a palace by
archaeologists but no spectacular finds were
associated with it. A stone statue was labelled and
continues to be known as the “priest-king”. This is
because archaeologists were familiar with
Mesopotamian history and its “priest-kings” and have
found parallels in the Indus region. But as we will
see (p.23), the ritual practices of the Harappan
civilisation are not well understood yet nor are there
any means of knowing whether those who performed
them also held political power.

Some archaeologists are of the opinion that
Harappan society had no rulers, and that everybody
enjoyed equal status. Others feel there was no single
ruler but several, that Mohenjodaro had a separate
ruler, Harappa another, and so forth. Yet others
argue that there was a single state, given the
similarity in artefacts, the evidence for planned
settlements, the standardised ratio of brick size, and
the establishment of settlements near sources of raw

Bricks, BEADS AND BoNES

17

material. As of now, the last theory seems the most
plausible, as it is unlikely that entire communities
could have collectively made and implemented such

complex decisions.

9. THE END OF THE CIVILISATION

There is evidence that by c. 1800 sce most of the Mature
Harappan sites in regions such as Cholistan had been

abandoned. Simultaneously, there was
an expansion of population into new
settlements in Gujarat, Haryana and
western Uttar Pradesh.

In the few Harappan sites that
continued to be occupied after 1900
BCE there appears to have been a
transformation of material culture,
marked by the disappearance of the
distinctive artefacts of the civilisation
- weights, seals, special beads.
Writing, long-distance trade, and
craft specialisation also disappeared.
In general, far fewer materials were
used to make far fewer things. House
construction techniques deteriorated
and large public structures were no
longer produced. Overall, artefacts
and settlements indicate a rural way
of life in what are called “Late
Harappan” or “successor cultures”.

What brought about these
changes? Several explanations have
been put forward. These range from
climatic change, deforestation,

Map 4 |
Areas of Late Harappan occupation

od

“SWAT
Pa
of
3 r
S| Aa” f
CEMETERY H 1 LATE
Up * SISWAL
Fs a4
Jf i Ne
Gave )
oP Ss
me JHUKAR

a” RANGPUR IIB C
a

ae

\

Arabian Sea

Sketch map not to scale

excessive floods, the shifting and/or drying up of
rivers, to overuse of the landscape. Some of these
“causes” may hold for certain settlements, but they
do not explain the collapse of the entire civilisation.

It appears that a strong unifying element, perhaps
the Harappan state, came to an end. This is
evidenced by the disappearance of seals, the script,
distinctive beads and pottery, the shift from a
standardised weight system to the use of local
weights; and the decline and abandonment of cities.
The subcontinent would have to wait for over a
millennium for new cities to develop in a completely

different region.

18

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Source 3

Evidence of an “invasion”

Deadman Lane is a narrow alley, varying from 3 to 6 feet in width ... At the point
where the lane turns westward, part of a skull and the bones of the thorax and
upper arm of an adult were discovered, all in very friable condition, at a depth of
4 ft 2 in. The body lay on its back diagonally across the lane. Fifteen inches to the
west were a few fragments of a tiny skull. It is to these remains that the lane owes
itsname.

From JOHN MARSHALL, Mohenjodaro and the Indus Civilisation, 1931.

Sixteen skeletons of people with the ornaments that they were wearing when they
died were found from the same part of Mohenjodaro in 1925.

Much later, in 1947, R.E.M. Wheeler, then Director-General of the ASI, tried to
correlate this archaeological evidence with that of the Rigveda, the earliest known
text in the subcontinent. He wrote:

The Rigveda mentions pur, meaning rampart, fort or stronghold. Indra, the Aryan
war-god is called puramdara, the fort-destroyer.

Where are — or were - these citadels? It has in the past been supposed that they
were mythical ... The recent excavation of Harappa may be thought to have
changed the picture. Here we have a highly evolved civilisation of essentially non-
Aryan type, now known to have employed massive fortifications ... What destroyed
this firmly settled civilisation? Climatic, economic or political deterioration may
have weakened it, but its ultimate extinction is more likely to have been completed
by deliberate and large-scale destruction. It may be no mere chance that at a late
period of Mohenjodaro men, women, and children, appear to have been
massacred there. On circumstantial evidence, Indra stands accused.

From R.E.M. WHEELER, “Harappa 1946”, Ancient Initia, 1947.

In the 1960s, the evidence of a massacre in Mohenjodaro was questioned by an
archaeologist named George Dales. He demonstrated that the skeletons found at the
site did not belong to the same period:

Whereas a couple of them definitely seem to indicate a slaughter, .. the bulk of
the bones were found in contexts suggesting burials of the sloppiest and most
irreverent nature. There is no destruction level covering the latest period of the
city, no sign of extensive burning, no bodies of warriors clad in armour and
surrounded by the weapons of war. The citadel, the only fortified part of the city,
yielded no evidence of a final defence.

From G.F. Dates, “The Mythical Massacre at Mohenjodaro”, Expeditcn , 1964.

As you can see, a careful re-examination of the data can sometimes lead to a reversal
of earlier interpretations.

> Discuss...
What are the similarities and differences between Maps 1, 2 and 4?

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES

10. DISCOVERING THE HARAPPAN

CIVILISATION

So far, we have examined facets of the Harappan
civilisation in the context of how archaeologists
have used evidence from material remains to
piece together parts of a fascinating history. However,
there is another story as well - about how
archaeologists “discovered” the civilisation.

When Harappan cities fell into ruin, people
gradually forgot all about them. When men and
women began living in the area millennia later, they
did not know what to make of the strange artefacts
that occasionally surfaced, washed by floods or
exposed by soil erosion, or turned up while ploughing
a field, or digging for treasure.

10.1 Cunningham’s confusion
When Cunningham, the first Director-General of the
ASI, began archaeological excavations in the mid-
nineteenth century, archaeologists preferred to use
the written word (texts and inscriptions) as a guide
to investigations. In fact, Cunningham’s main
interest was in the archaeology of the Early Historic
(c. sixth century sce-fourth century cE) and later
periods. He used the accounts left by Chinese
Buddhist pilgrims who had visited the subcontinent
between the fourth and seventh centuries ce to locate
early settlements. Cunningham also collected,
documented and translated inscriptions found during
his surveys. When he excavated sites he tended to
recover artefacts that he thought had cultural value.
A site like Harappa, which was not part of the
itinerary of the Chinese pilgrims and was not known
as an Early Historic city, did not fit very neatly within
his framework of investigation. So, although
Harappan artefacts were found fairly often during
the nineteenth century and some of these reached
Cunningham, he did not realise how old these were.
A Harappan seal was given to Cunningham by an
Englishman. He noted the object, but unsuccessfully
tried to place it within the time-frame with which
he was familiar. This was because he, like many
others, thought that Indian history began with the
first cities in the Ganga valley (see Chapter 2). Given
his specific focus, it is not surprising that he missed
the significance of Harappa.

19

é
! foes
a

{
u
a

Fig. 1.24
Cunningham’s sketch of the first-
known seal from Harappa

20

ee
Sites, mounds, layers

Archaeological stes are formed
through the production, use
and discarding of materials
and structures. When people
continue to live in the same
place, their constant use and
reuse of the landscape results
in the build up of occupational
debris, called a mound. Brief
or permanent abandonment
results in alteration of the
landscape by wind or water
activity and erosion. Occupations
are detected by traces of
ancient materials found in
layers, which differ from one
another in colour, texture and
the artefacts that are found
in them. Abandonment or
desertions, what are called
“sterile layers”, can be
identified by the absence of
such traces.

Generally, the lowest layers
are the oldest and the highest
are the most recent. The study
of these layers is called
stratigraphy. Artefacts found in
layers can be assigned to
specific ailtural periods and
can thus provide the adtural

sequence for a site.

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

10.2 A new old civilisation

Subsequently, seals were discovered at Harappa by
archaeologists such as Daya Ram Sahni in the early
decades of the twentieth century, in layers that were
definitely much older than Early Historic levels. It
was then that their significance began to be realised.
Another archaeologist, Rakhal Das Banerji found
similar seals at Mohenjodaro, leading to the
conjecture that these sites were part of a single
archaeological culture. Based on these finds, in 1924,
John Marshall, Director-General of the ASI,
announced the discovery of a new civilisation in the
Indus valley to the world. As S.N. Roy noted in
The Story of Indian Archaeology, “Marshall left India
three thousand years older than he had found her.”
This was because similar, till-then-unidentified
seals were found at excavations at Mesopotamian
sites. It was then that the world knew not only of a
new civilisation, but also of one contemporaneous
with Mesopotamia.

In fact, John Marshall's stint as Director-General
of the ASI marked a major change in Indian
archaeology. He was the first professional
archaeologist to work in India, and brought his
experience of working in Greece and Crete to the
field. More importantly, though like Cunningham he
too was interested in spectacular finds, he was
equally keen to look for patterns of everyday life.

Marshall tended to excavate along regular
horizontal units, measured uniformly throughout the
mound, ignoring the stratigraphy of the site. This
meant that all the artefacts recovered from the same
unit were grouped together, even if they were found
at different stratigraphic layers. As a result, valuable

Fig. 1.25
The stratigraphy of a small mound

Notice that the layers are not exactly horizontal.

So TARP Co 2 Taen= Botan

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES

information about the context of these finds was
irretrievably lost.

10.3 New techniques and questions

It was R.E.M. Wheeler, after he took over as Director-
General of the ASI in 1944, who rectified this
problem. Wheeler recognised that it was necessary
to follow the stratigraphy of the mound rather
than dig mechanically along uniform horizontal
lines. Moreover, as an ex-army brigadier, he brought
with him a military precision to the practice
of archaeology.

The frontiers of the Harappan civilisation have
little or no connection with present-day national
boundaries. However, with the partition of the
subcontinent and the creation of Pakistan, the major
sites are now in Pakistani territory. This has spurred
Indian archaeologists to try and locate sites in India.
An extensive survey in Kutch has revealed a number
of Harappan settlements and explorations in Punjab
and Haryana have added to the list of Harappan
sites. While Kalibangan, Lothal, Rakhi Garhi and
most recently Dholavira have been discovered,
explored and excavated as part of these efforts, fresh
explorations continue.

Over the decades, new issues have assumed
importance. Where some archaeologists are often
keen to obtain a cultural sequence, others try to
understand the logic underlying the location of
specific sites. They also grapple with the wealth of
artefacts, trying to figure out the functions these
may have served.

Since the 1980s, there has also been growing
international interest in Harappan archaeology.
Specialists from the subcontinent and abroad have
been jointly working at both Harappa and
Mohenjodaro. They are using modern scientific
techniques including surface exploration to recover
traces of clay, stone, metal and plant and animal
remains as well as to minutely analyse every scrap
of available evidence. These explorations promise to
yield interesting results in the future.

~ Discuss...

Which of the themes in this chapter would have
interested Cunningham? Which are the issues
that have been of interest since 1947?

21

Wheeler at Harappa

Early archaeologists were often
driven by a sense of adventure.
This is what Wheeler wrote
about his experience at
Harappa:
It was, I recall, on a warm
May night in 1944 that a four
miles’ tonga-ride brought me
as the newly appointed
Director General of the
Archaeological Survey with
my local Muslim officer from
a little railway-station labelled
“Harappa” along a deep
sand track to a small rest-
house beside the moonlit
mounds of the ancient site.
Warned by my anxious
colleague that we must start
our inspection at 5.30 next
morning and finish by 7.30
“after which it would be too
hot”, we turned in with the
dark figure of the punka-walla
crouched patiently in the
entrance and the night
air rent by innumerable
jackals in the neighbouring
wilderness.

Next morning, punctually
at 5.30, our little procession
started out towards the sandy
heaps. Within ten minutes I
stopped and rubbed my eyes
as I gazed upon the tallest
mound, scarcely trusting my
vision. Six hours later my
embarrassed staff and I were
still toiling with picks and
knives under the blazing sun,
the mad sahib (I am afraid)
setting a relentless pace.

From R.E.M. WHEELER,
My Archaeological Mission
to Intia and Bkistan, 1976.

22

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

11. PROBLEMS OF PIECING TOGETHER
THE PAST

As we have seen, it is not the Harappan script that
helps in understanding the ancient civilisation. Rather,
it is material evidence that allows archaeologists to
better reconstruct Harappan life. This material could
be pottery, tools, ornaments, household objects, ete.
Organic materials such as cloth, leather, wood and
reeds generally decompose, especially in tropical
regions. What survive are stone, burnt clay (or
terracotta), metal, etc.

It is also important to remember that only broken
or useless objects would have been thrown away.
Other things would probably have been recycled.
Consequently, valuable artefacts that are found
intact were either lost in the past or hoarded and
never retrieved. In other words, such finds are
accidental rather than typical.

11.1 Classifying finds

Recovering artefacts is just the beginning of the
archaeological enterprise. Archaeologists then
classify their finds. One simple principle of
classification is in terms of material, such as stone,
clay, metal, bone, ivory, etc. The second, and more
complicated, is in terms of function: archaeologists
have to decide whether, for instance, an artefact is
a tool or an ornament, or both, or something meant
for ritual use.

An understanding of the function of an artefact is
often shaped by its resemblance with present-day
things —- beads, querns, stone blades and pots are
obvious examples. Archaeologists also try to identify
the function of an artefact by investigating the
context in which it was found: was it found in a
house, in a drain, in a grave, in a kiln?

Sometimes, archaeologists have to take recourse
to indirect evidence. For instance, though there are
traces of cotton at some Harappan sites, to find out
about clothing we have to depend on indirect
evidence including depictions in sculpture.

Archaeologists have to develop frames of reference.
We have seen that the first Harappan seal that was
found could not be understood till archaeologists had
a context in which to place it - both in terms of the
cultural sequence in which it was found, and in
terms of a comparison with finds in Mesopotamia.

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES

11.2 Problems of interpretation

The problems of archaeological interpretation are
perhaps most evident in attempts to reconstruct
religious practices. Early archaeologists thought that
certain objects which seemed unusual or unfamiliar
may have had a religious significance. These included
terracotta figurines of women, heavily jewelled, some
with elaborate head-dresses. These were regarded
as mother goddesses. Rare stone statuary of men in
an almost standardised posture, seated with one
hand on the knee - such as the “priest-king” - was
also similarly classified. In other instances,
structures have been assigned ritual significance.
These include the Great Bath and fire altars found
at Kalibangan and Lothal.

Attempts have also been made to reconstruct
religious beliefs and practices by examining seals,
some of which seem to depict ritual scenes. Others,
with plant motifs, are thought to indicate nature
worship. Some animals - such as the one-horned
animal, often called the “unicorn” - depicted on seals
seem to be mythical, composite creatures. In some
seals, a figure shown seated cross-legged in a “yogic”
posture, sometimes surrounded by animals, has
been regarded as a depiction of “proto-Shiva”, that
is, an early form of one of the major deities of
Hinduism. Besides, conical stone objects have been
classified as lingas.

Many reconstructions of Harappan religion are
made on the assumption that later traditions provide
parallels with earlier ones. This is because
archaeologists often move from the known to the
unknown, that is, from the present to the past. While
this is plausible in the case of stone querns and
pots, it becomes more speculative when we extend
it to “religious” symbols.

Let us look, for instance, at the “proto-Shiva” seals.
The earliest religious text, the Rigveda (compiled c.
1500-1000 sce) mentions a god named Rudra, which
is a name used for Shiva in later Puranic traditions
(in the first millennium cE; see also Chapter 4).
However, unlike Shiva, Rudra in the Rigveda is
neither depicted as Pashupati (lord of animals in
general and cattle in particular), nor as a yogi. In
other words, this depiction does not match the
description of Rudra in the Rigveda. Is this, then,
possibly a shaman as some scholars have suggested?

23

Fig. 1.26
Was this a mother goddess?

Fig. 1.27
A “proto-Shiva” seal

A linga is a polished stone
that is worshipped as a
symbol of Shiva.

24 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Shamans are. men ands What has been achieved after so many decades of
women who claim magical archaeological work? We have a fairly good idea of
and healing powers, as well the Harappan economy. We have been able to tease
as an ability to communicate out social differences and we have some idea of how
with the other world. the civilisation functioned. It is really not clear how
much more we would know if the script were to be
deciphered. If a bilingual inscription is found,
questions about the languages spoken by the
Harappans could perhaps be put to rest.

Several reconstructions remain speculative at
present. Was the Great Bath a ritual structure? How
widespread was literacy? Why do Harappan
cemeteries show little social differentiation? Also
unanswered are questions on gender — did women
make pottery or did they only paint pots (as at
present)? What about other craftspersons? What were
the terracotta female figurines used for? Very few
scholars have investigated issues of gender in the
context of the Harappan civilisation and this is a
whole new area for future work.

a i,

Fig. 1.28
Gamesmen or lingas?

This is what Mackay, one of the

earliest excavators, had to say

about these stones:
Various small cones made
of lapis lazuli, jasper,
chalcedony, and other
stones, most beautifully cut
and finished, and less than
two inches in height, are also
thought to be lingas ... on the
other hand, it is just as
possible that they were used
in the board-games ...

From Ernest MAckay, Early
Indus Civilisaticn, 1948.

> Discuss...

What are the aspects of
Harappan economy that have
been reconstructed from Fig. 1.29
archaeological evidence? A terracotta cart

Bricks, BEADS AND BONES

25

(7

MAJOR PERIODS IN EARLY INDIAN ARCHAEOLOGY

TIMELINE 1 >»

2 million Bp
(BEFORE PRESENT}

Lower Palaeolithic

80,000 Middle Palaeolithic

35,000 Upper Palaeolithic

12,000 Mesolithic

10,000 Neolithic (early agriculturists and pastoralists)
6,000 Chalcolithic (first use of copper)

2600 BCE Harappan civilisation

1000 sBcE Early iron, megalithic burials

600 scE-400 cE

Early Historic

d

(Note: All dates are approximate. Besides, there are wide variations in developments in
ifferent parts of the subcontinent. Dates indicated are for the earliest evidence of each phase. yy,

\.
Va

MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS IN HARAPPAN ARCHAEOLOGY

Nineteenth century

1875

TIMELINE 2 /)

Report of Alexander Cunningham on Harappan seal

Twentieth century

1921 M.S. Vats begins excavations at Harappa

1925 Excavations begin at Mohenjodaro

1946 R.E.M. Wheeler excavates at Harappa

1955 S.R. Rao begins excavations at Lothal

1960 B.B. Lal and B.K. Thapar begin excavations at Kalibangan

1974 M.R. Mughal begins explorations in Bahawalpur

1980 A team of German and Italian archaeologists begins surface
explorations at Mohenjodaro

1986 American team begins excavations at Harappa

1990

R.S. Bisht begins excavations at Dholavira }

26 THEMES IN INDIAN History

List the items of food
available to people in
Harappan cities. Identify
the groups who would
have provided these.

How do archaeologists
trace socio-economic
differences in Harappan
society? What are the
differences that they
notice?

Would you agree that
the drainage system in
Harappan cities indicates
town planning? Give
reasons for your answer.

List the materials used to
make beads in the
Harappan civilisation.
Describe the process by
which any one kind of bead
was made.

Look at Fig. 1.30 and
describe what you see.
How is the body placed?
What are the objects
placed near it? Are there
any artefacts on the body?
Do these indicate the sex of
the skeleton?

Fig. 1.30
A Harappan burial

BRICKS,

BEADS AND BONES

WRITE A SHORT ESSAY (ABOUT
500 WORDS) ON THE FOLLOWING:

Describe some of the distinctive features of
Mohenjodaro.

List the raw materials required for craft
production in the Harappan civilisation and
discuss how these might have been obtained.

Discuss how archaeologists reconstruct the past.

Discuss the functions that may have been
performed by rulers in Harappan society.

tae
10.

AP WORK

On Map 1, use a pencil to circle sites where
evidence of agriculture has been recovered. Mark
an X against sites where there is evidence of craft
production and R against sites where raw
materials were found.

=

Sy

11.

12.

PROJECT (ANY ONE)

Find out if there are any museums in your town.
Visit one of them and write a report on any ten
items, describing how old they are, where they
were found, and why you think they are on
display.

Collect illustrations of ten things made of stone,
metal and clay produced and used at present.
Match these with the pictures of the Harappan
civilisation in this chapter, and discuss the
similarities and differences that you find.

27

Lig)

If you would like to know
more, read:

Raymond and Bridget Allchin.
1997. Origins of a Civilization.
Viking, New Delhi.

G.L. Possehl. 2003.
The Indus Civilization.
Vistaar, New Delhi.

Shereen Ratnagar. 2001.
Understanding Harappa.
Tulika, New Delhi.

For more information, ~—

you could visit:
http://www. harappa.com/hatr/
harresO. html

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS
EARLY STATES AND ECONOMIES
(Cc. 6OO BcE-GOO cE)

There were several developments in different parts of the
subcontinent during the long span of 1,500 years following
the end of the Harappan civilisation. This was also the
period during which the Rigveda was composed by people
living along the Indus and its tributaries. Agricultural
settlements emerged in many parts of the
subcontinent, including north India, the
Deccan Plateau, and parts of Karnataka.
Besides, there is evidence of pastoral
populations in the Deccan and further
south. New modes of disposal of the dead,
including the making of elaborate stone
structures known as megaliths, emerged in
central and south India from the first
millennium sce. In many cases, the dead
were buried with a rich range of iron tools
and weapons.

Fig. 2.1 From c. sixth century scr, there is
An inscription, Sanchi evidence that there were other trends as well. Perhaps
(Madhya Pradesh), the most visible was the emergence of early states, empires
c. second century BCE and kingdoms. Underlying these political processes were

other changes, evident in the ways in which agricultural
production was organised. Simultaneously, new towns
appeared almost throughout the subcontinent.

Historians attempt to understand these developments
by drawing on a range of sources - inscriptions, texts,
coins and visual material. As we will see, this is a complex
process. You will also notice that these sources do not
tell the entire story.

1. PRINSEP AND PTYADASSI

Some of the most momentous developments in Indian
epigraphy took place in the 1830s. This was when
James Prinsep, an officer in the mint of the East
India Company, deciphered Brahmi and Kharosthi,
two scripts used in the earliest inscriptions and
coins. He found that most of these mentioned a king
referred to as Piyadassi - meaning “pleasant to
behold”; there were a few inscriptions which also

Epigraphy is the study of
inscriptions.

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

referred to the king as Asoka, one of the most famous
rulers known from Buddhist texts.

This gave a new direction to investigations into
early Indian political history as European and
Indian scholars used inscriptions and texts
composed in a variety of languages to reconstruct
the lineages of major dynasties that had ruled the
subcontinent. As a result, the broad contours of
political history were in place by the early decades
of the twentieth century.

Subsequently, scholars began to shift their focus
to the context of political history, investigating
whether there were connections between political
changes and economic and social developments. It
was soon realised that while there were links, these
were not always simple or direct.

2. THE EARLIEST STATES

2.1 The sixteen mahajanapadas

The sixth century sce is often regarded as a major
turning point in early Indian history. It is an era
associated with early states, cities, the growing
use of iron, the development of coinage, etc. It
also witnessed the growth of diverse systems of
thought, including Buddhism and Jainism. Early
Buddhist and Jaina texts (see also Chapter 4)
mention, amongst other things, sixteen states
known as mahajanapadas. Although the lists vary,
some names such as Vajji, Magadha, Koshala,
Kuru, Panchala, Gandhara and Avanti occur
frequently. Clearly, these were amongst the most
important mahajanapadas.

While most mahajanapadas were ruled by kings,
some, known as ganas or sanghas, were oligarchies
(p. 30), where power was shared by a number of
men, often collectively called rajas. Both Mahavira
and the Buddha (Chapter 4) belonged to such ganas.
In some instances, as in the case of the Vajji sangha,
the rajas probably controlled resources such as land
collectively. Although their histories are often difficult
to reconstruct due to the lack of sources, some of
these states lasted for nearly a thousand years.

Each mahajanapada had a capital city, which was
often fortified. Maintaining these fortified cities as
well as providing for incipient armies and
bureaucracies required resources. From c. sixth

29

Inscriptions

Inscriptions are writings
engraved on hard surfaces
such as stone, metal or
pottery. They usually record
the achievements, activities
or ideas of those who
commissioned them and
include the exploits of kings,
or donations made by
women and men to religious
institutions. Inscriptions are
virtually permanent records,
some of which carry dates.
Others are dated on the
basis of palaeography or
styles of writing, with a fair
amount of precision. For
instance, in c. 250 BCE
the letter “a” was written like
this: Y. By c 500 cz, it was
written like this: } .

The earliest inscriptions
were in Prakrit, a name for
languages used by ordinary
people. Names of rulers such
as Ajatasattu and Asoka,
known from Prakrit texts and
inscriptions, have been spelt in
their Prakrit forms in this
chapter. You will also find
terms in languages such as Pali,
Tamil and Sanskrit, which
too were used to write
inscriptions and texts. It is
possible that people spoke in
other languages as well, even
though these were not used
for writing.

Janapada, meaning the land
where a jana (a people, clan or
tribe) sets its foot or settles. It
is a word used in both Prakrit
and Sanskrit.

30

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

KAMBOJA

Pushkalavati «

GANDHARA ~ * Taxila

Sketch map not to scale

COO OT OO TT eee 4

> Which were the areas
where states and cities were
most densely clustered?

Oligarchy refers to a form of
government where power is
exercised by a group of men.
The Roman Republic, about
which you read last year, was
an oligarchy in spite ofits name.

MALLA
KURU
SHURASENA BC ae ic? Kusinagara
.
Mathura® ravastl VAJJI (VRIJJI) ANGA
MATSYA ne eeee » Vaishali /
KASHI
=~ MAGADHA.~-* Champa
Kaushambi" Varanasi ® Rajir
VATSA
CHEDI VANGA
AVANTI
* Ujjayini
Arabian Sea
Bay of Bengal
ASHMAKA

Map 1
Early states and their capitals

2/ndraprastha
* Ahichchhatra

century BcE onwards, Brahmanas began composing
Sanskrit texts known as the Dharmasutras. These
laid down norms for rulers (as well as for other
social categories), who were ideally expected to be
Kshatriyas (see also Chapter 3). Rulers were advised
to collect taxes and tribute from cultivators, traders
and artisans. Were resources also procured
from pastoralists and forest peoples? We do not
really know. What we do know is that raids on
neighbouring states were recognised as a legitimate
means of acquiring wealth. Gradually, some states
acquired standing armies and maintained regular
bureaucracies. Others continued to depend on
militia, recruited, more often than not, from the
peasantry.

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

2.2 First amongst the sixteen: Magadha
Between the sixth and the fourth centuries sce,
Magadha (in present-day Bihar) became the most
powerful mahajanapada. Modern historians explain
this development in a variety of ways: Magadha was
a region where agriculture was especially productive.
Besides, iron mines (in present-day Jharkhand) were
accessible and provided resources for tools and
weapons. Elephants, an important component of the
army, were found in forests in the region. Also, the
Ganga and its tributaries provided a means of cheap
and convenient communication. However, early
Buddhist and Jaina writers who wrote about
Magadha attributed its power to the policies of
individuals: ruthlessly ambitious kings of whom
Bimbisara, Ajatasattu and Mahapadma Nanda are
the best known, and their ministers, who helped
implement their policies.

Initially, Rajagaha (the Prakrit name for present-
day Rajgir in Bihar) was the capital of Magadha.
Interestingly, the old name means “house of the
king”. Rajagaha was a fortified settlement, located
amongst hills. Later, in the fourth century sce, the
capital was shifted to Pataliputra, present-day
Patna, commanding routes of communication along
the Ganga.

31

~ Discuss...

What are the different
explanations offered by early
writers and present-day
historians for the growth of
Magadhan power?

Fig. 2.2
Fortification walls at Rajgir

CTT TTT ml
| D> Why were these walls built? |
—eeEeEeEeEeEeEeEEeEEEEeEeeEeEEEEEEEEEEeEeeee za

32

Languages and scripts

Most Asokan inscriptions were in
the Prakrit language while
those in the northwest of
the subcontinet were in Aramaic
and Greek. Most Prakrit

inscriptions were written in the
Brahmi script; however, some, in
the northwest, were written in
Kharosthi. The Aramaic and
Greek scripts were used for
inscriptions in Afghanistan.

Fig. 2.3
The lion capital

-
|

> Why is the lion capital
considered important today?

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

3. AN EARLY EMPIRE

The growth of Magadha culminated in the emergence
of the Mauryan Empire. Chandragupta Maurya, who
founded the empire (c. 321 BcE), extended control as
far northwest as Afghanistan and Baluchistan, and
his grandson Asoka, arguably the most famous ruler
of early India, conquered Kalinga (present-day
coastal Orissa).

3.1 Finding out about the Mauryas

Historians have used a variety of sources to
reconstruct the history of the Mauryan Empire.
These include archaeological finds, especially
sculpture. Also valuable are contemporary works,
such as the account of Megasthenes (a Greek
ambassador to the court of Chandragupta Maurya),
which survives in fragments. Another source that
is often used is the Arthashastra, parts of which
were probably composed by Kautilya or Chanakya,
traditionally believed to be the minister of
Chandragupta. Besides, the Mauryas are mentioned
in later Buddhist, Jaina and Puranic literature, as
well as in Sanskrit literary works. While these are
useful, the inscriptions of Asoka (c. 272/268-231
BCE) on rocks and pillars are often regarded as
amongst the most valuable sources.

Asoka was the first ruler who inscribed his
messages to his subjects and officials on stone
surfaces — natural rocks as well as polished pillars.
He used the inscriptions to proclaim what he
understood to be dhamma. This included respect
towards elders, generosity towards Brahmanas and
those who renounced worldly life, treating slaves
and servants kindly, and respect for religions and
traditions other than one’s own.

3.2 Administering the empire

There were five major political centres in the
empire - the capital Pataliputra and the provincial
centres of Taxila, Ujjayini, Tosali and Suvarnagiri,
all mentioned in Asokan inscriptions. If we
examine the content of these inscriptions, we find
virtually the same message engraved everywhere
- from the present-day North West Frontier
Provinces of Pakistan, to Andhra Pradesh, Orissa
and Uttaranchal in India. Could this vast empire
have had a uniform administrative system?
Historians have increasingly come to realise that

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

Arabian Sea

A MAJOR ROCK EDICTS
IB MINOR ROCK EDICTS
@ PILLAR INSCRIPTIONS

Sketch map not to scale

Bay of Bengal

this is unlikely. The regions included within the
empire were just too diverse. Imagine the contrast
between the hilly terrain of Afghanistan and the
coast of Orissa.

It is likely that administrative control was
strongest in areas around the capital and the
provincial centres. These centres were carefully
chosen, both Taxila and Ujjayini being situated
on important long-distance trade routes, while
Suvarnagiri (literally, the golden mountain) was
possibly important for tapping the gold mines
of Karnataka.

33

34

Source 1

Here is an excerpt from the

What the king’s
officials did

account of Megasthenes:

r

Of the great officers of state,
some ... superintend the
rivers, measure the land, as
is done in Egypt, and inspect
the sluices by which water is
let out from the main canals
into their branches, so that
every one may have an
equal supply of it. The same
persons have charge also
of the huntsmen, and are
entrusted with the power of
rewarding or punishing them
according to their deserts.
They collect the taxes, and
superintend the occupations
connected with land; as those
of the woodcutters, the
carpenters, the blacksmiths,
and the miners.

> Why were officials
appointed to supervise these
| occupational groups?

>

Discuss...

Read the excerpts from
Megasthenes and the
Arthashastra (Sources 1 and

2).

think these texts are useful in

To what extent do you

reconstructing a history of
Mauryan administration?

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Communication along both land and riverine
routes was vital for the existence of the empire.
Journeys from the centre to the provinces could have
taken weeks if not months. This meant arranging
for provisions as well as protection for those who
were on the move. It is obvious that the army was
an important means for ensuring the latter.
Megasthenes mentions a committee with six
subcommittees for coordinating military activity. Of
these, one looked after the navy, the second managed
transport and provisions, the third was responsible
for foot-soldiers, the fourth for horses, the fifth for
chariots and the sixth for elephants. The activities
of the second subcommittee were rather varied:
arranging for bullock carts to carry equipment,
procuring food for soldiers and fodder for animals,
and recruiting servants and artisans to look after
the soldiers.

Asoka also tried to hold his empire together by
propagating dhamma, the principles of which, as we
have seen, were simple and virtually universally
applicable. This, according to him, would ensure the
well-being of people in this world and the next.
Special officers, known as the dhamma mahamatta,
were appointed to spread the message of dhamma.

3.3 How important was the empire?

When historians began reconstructing early Indian
history in the nineteenth century, the emergence
of the Mauryan Empire was regarded as a major
landmark. India was then under colonial rule, and
was part of the British empire. Nineteenth and
early twentieth century Indian historians found
the possibility that there was an empire in early
India both challenging and exciting. Also, some of
the archaeological finds associated with the
Mauryas, including stone sculpture, were
considered to be examples of the spectacular art
typical of empires. Many of these historians found
the message on Asokan inscriptions very different
from that of most other rulers, suggesting that
Asoka was more powerful and industrious, as also
more humble than later rulers who adopted
grandiose titles. So it is not surprising that
nationalist leaders in the twentieth century
regarded him as an inspiring figure.

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

Yet, how important was the Mauryan Empire? It
lasted for about 150 years, which is not a very long
time in the vast span of the history of the
subcontinent. Besides, if you look at Map 2, you will
notice that the empire did not encompass the entire
subcontinent. And even within the frontiers of the
empire, control was not uniform. By the second
century BcE, new chiefdoms and kingdoms emerged
in several parts of the subcontinent.

4. NEW NOTIONS OF KINGSHIP

4.1 Chiefs and kings in the south

The new kingdoms that emerged in the Deccan and
further south, including the chiefdoms of the Cholas,
Cheras and Pandyas in Tamilakam (the name of the
ancient Tamil country, which included parts of
present-day Andhra Pradesh and Kerala, in addition
to Tamil Nadu), proved to be stable and prosperous.

ee
Chiefs and chiefdoms

A chief is a powerful man whose position may or may
not be hereditary. He derives support from his kinfolk.
His functions may include performing special rituals,
leadership in warfare, and arbitrating disputes. He
receives gifts from his subordinates (unlike kings who
usually collect taxes) and often distributes these amongst
his supporters. Generally, there are no regular armies
and officials in chiefdoms.

We know about these states from a variety of
sources. For instance, the early Tamil Sangam texts
(see also Chapter 3) contain poems describing chiefs
and the ways in which they acquired and
distributed resources.

Many chiefs and kings, including the
Satavahanas who ruled over parts of western and
central India (c. second century scEe-second century
cE) and the Shakas, a people of Central Asian origin
who established kingdoms in the north-western and
western parts of the subcontinent, derived revenues
from long-distance trade. Their social origins were
often obscure, but, as we will see in the case of the
Satavahanas (Chapter 3), once they acquired power
they attempted to claim social status in a variety
of ways.

35

Source 2

Capturing elephants
for the army

The Arthashastra lays down
minute details of administrative
and military organisation. This is
what it says about how to
capture elephants:

Guards of elephant forests,
assisted by those who rear
elephants, those who
enchain the legs of
elephants, those who guard
the boundaries, those who
live in forests, as well as by
those who nurse elephants,
shall, with the help of five or
seven female elephants to
help in tethering wild ones,
trace the whereabouts of
herds of elephants by
following the course of urine
and dung left by elephants.

According to Greek sources,
the Mauryan ruler had a
standing army of 600,000
foot-soldiers, 30,000 cavalry
and 9,000 elephants. Some
historians consider these
accounts to be exaggerated.

CT TTT TT 7

| > Ifthe Greek accounts |
were true, what kinds of |

l resources do you think the l
Mauryan ruler would have

| required to maintain such |

2 large army?

36

Source 3

The Pandya chief
Senguttuvan visits
the forest

This is an excerpt from the
Silappadikaram, an epic written
in Tamil:

(When he visited the forest)
people came down the
mountain, singing and
dancing ... just as the defeated
show respect to the victorious
king, so did they bring gifts —
ivory, fragrant wood, fans made
of the hair of deer, honey,
sandalwood, red _ ochre,
antimony, turmeric, cardamom,
pepper, etc. ... they brought
coconuts, mangoes, medicinal
plants, fruits, onions, sugarcane,
flowers, areca nut, bananas, baby
tigers, lions, elephants, monkeys,
bear, deer, musk deer, fox,
peacocks, musk cat, wild cocks,
speaking parrots, etc. ...

| > Why did people bring |
| these gifts? What would the |
| chief have used these for? |

Fig. 2.4

A Kushana coin

Obverse: King Kanishka

Reverse: A deity
SS
> How has the king been

portrayed?
be

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

4.2 Divine kings

One means of claiming high status was to identify
with a variety of deities. This strategy is best
exemplified by the Kushanas (c. first century BcE-
first century ce), who ruled over a vast kingdom
extending from Central Asia to northwest India. Their
history has been reconstructed from inscriptions and
textual traditions. The notions of kingship they
wished to project are perhaps best evidenced in their
coins and sculpture.

Colossal statues of Kushana rulers have been
found installed in a shrine at Mat near Mathura
(Uttar Pradesh). Similar statues have been found in
a shrine in Afghanistan as well. Some historians
feel this indicates that the Kushanas considered
themselves godlike. Many Kushana rulers also
adopted the title devaputra, or “son of god”, possibly
inspired by Chinese rulers who called themselves
sons of heaven.

By the fourth century there is evidence of larger
states, including the Gupta Empire. Many of these
depended on samantas, men who maintained
themselves through local resources including control
over land. They offered homage and provided military
support to rulers. Powerful samantas could become
kings: conversely, weak rulers might find themselves
being reduced to positions of subordination.

Histories of the Gupta rulers have been
reconstructed from literature, coins and inscriptions,
including prashastis, composed in praise of kings in
particular, and patrons in general, by poets. While
historians often attempt to draw factual information
from such compositions, those who composed and
read them often treasured them as works of poetry

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS 37

rather than as accounts that were literally true. The

Prayaga Prashasti (also known as the Allahabad Pillar

Inscription) composed in Sanskrit by Harishena, the Fig. 2.5

court poet of Samudragupta, arguably the most — Sandstone sculpture of a
powerful of the Gupta rulers (c. fourth century cE), Kushana king

is a case in point. CT TTT TTT TT TTT 7
| 2 What are the elements in |

Source 4 | the sculpture that suggest |
| that this is an image of a king? |
4

In praise of Samudragupta

This is an excerpt from the Prayaga
Prashasti:

He was without an antagonist on earth;
he, by the overflowing of the multitude
of (his) many good qualities adorned
by hundreds of good actions, has
wiped off the fame of other kings with
the soles of (his) feet; (he is) Purusha
(the Supreme Being), being the cause
of the prosperity of the good and the
destruction of the bad (he is)
incomprehensible; (he is) one whose
tender heart can be captured only by
devotion and humility; (he is)
possessed of compassion; (he is) the
giver of many hundred-thousands of
cows; (his) mind has received
ceremonial initiation for the uplift of
the miserable, the poor, the forlorn and
the suffering; (he is) resplendent and
embodied kindness to mankind; (he is)
equal to (the gods) Kubera (the god of
wealth), Varuna (the god of the
ocean), Indra (the god of rains) and
Yama (the god of death)...

> Discuss...
Why do you think kings
claimed divine status?

38

Source 5

The Sudarshana

(beautiful) lake in Gujarat

Find Girnar on Map 2. The
Sudarshana lake was an artificial
reservoir. We know about
it from a rock inscription
(c. second century cE) in
Sanskrit, composed to record
the achievements of the Shaka
ruler Rudradaman.

The inscription mentions that
the lake, with embankments and
water channels, was built by a
local governor during the
rule of the Mauryas. However,
a terrible storm broke
the embankments and water
gushed out of the lake.
Rudradaman, who was then
ruling in the area, claimed to
have got the lake repaired using
his own resources, without
imposing any tax on his subjects.

Another inscription on the
same rock (c fifth century)
mentions how one of the rulers
of the Gupta dynasty got the
lake repaired once again.

r 7
> Why did rulers make |
arrangements for
irrigation? |

Transplantation is used for
paddy cultivation in areas
where water is plentiful. Here,
seeds are first broadcast; when
the saplings have grown they
are transplanted in waterlogged
fields. This ensures a higher
ratio of survival of saplings and
higher yields.

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

5. A CHANGING COUNTRYSIDE

5.1 Popular perceptions of kings
What did subjects think about their rulers?
Obviously, inscriptions do not provide all the answers.
In fact, ordinary people rarely left accounts of their
thoughts and experiences. Nevertheless, historians
have tried to solve this problem by examining stories
contained in anthologies such as the Jatakas and
the Panchatantra. Many of these stories probably
originated as popular oral tales that were later
committed to writing. The Jatakas were written in
Pali around the middle of the first millennium cer.

One story known as the Gandatindu Jataka
describes the plight of the subjects of a wicked king;
these included elderly women and men, cultivators,
herders, village boys and even animals. When the
king went in disguise to find out what his subjects
thought about him, each one of them cursed him for
their miseries, complaining that they were attacked
by robbers at night and by tax collectors during the
day. To escape from this situation, people abandoned
their village and went to live in the forest.

As this story indicates, the relationship between
a king and his subjects, especially the rural
population, could often be strained - kings
frequently tried to fill their coffers by demanding
high taxes, and peasants particularly found such
demands oppressive. Escaping into the forest
remained an option, as reflected in the Jataka story.
Meanwhile, other strategies aimed at increasing
production to meet growing demand for taxes also
came to be adopted.

5.2 Strategies for increasing production
One such strategy was the shift to plough
agriculture, which spread in fertile alluvial river
valleys such as those of the Ganga and the Kaveri
from c. sixth century sce. The iron-tipped
ploughshare was used to turn the alluvial soil in
areas which had high rainfall. Moreover, in some
parts of the Ganga valley, production of paddy was
dramatically increased by the introduction of
transplantation, although this meant back-breaking
work for the producer.

While the iron ploughshare led to a growth in
agricultural productivity, its use was restricted to
certain parts of the subcontinent - cultivators in

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

areas which were semi-arid, such as parts of Punjab
and Rajasthan did not adopt it till the twentieth
century, and those living in hilly tracts in the north-
eastern and central parts of the subcontinent
practised hoe agriculture, which was much better
suited to the terrain.

Another strategy adopted to increase agricultural
production was the use of irrigation, through
wells and tanks, and less commonly, canals.
Communities as well as individuals organised the
construction of irrigation works. The latter, usually
powerful men including kings, often recorded such
activities in inscriptions.

5.3 Differences in rural society

While these technologies often led to an increase in
production, the benefits were very uneven. What is
evident is that there was a growing differentiation
amongst people engaged in agriculture - stories,
especially within the Buddhist tradition, refer to
landless agricultural labourers, small peasants, as
well as large landholders. The term gahapati was
often used in Pali texts to designate the second and
third categories. The large landholders, as well as
the village headman (whose position was often
hereditary), emerged as powerful figures, and often
exercised control over other cultivators. Early Tamil
literature (the Sangam texts) also mentions different
categories of people living in the villages - large
landowners or vellalar, ploughmen or uzhavar and
slaves or adimai. It is likely that these differences
were based on differential access to land, labour
and some of the new technologies. In such a
situation, questions of control over land must have
become crucial, as these were often discussed in
legal texts.

ee
Gahapati

A gahapati was the owner, master or head of a
household, who exercised control over the women,
children, slaves and workers who shared a common
residence. He was also the owner of the resources —
land, animals and other things — that belonged to the
household. Sometimes the term was used as a marker
of status for men belonging to the urban elite, including
wealthy merchants.

39

Source 6

The importance of

boundaries

The Manusmrti is one of the
best-known legal texts of early
India, written in Sanskrit and
compiled between c second
century pce and c second
century cE. This is what the text
advises the king to do:

Seeing that in the world
controversies constantly arise
due to the ignorance of
boundaries, he should ...
have ... concealed boundary
markers buried — stones,
bones, cow’s hair, chaff,
ashes, potsherds, dried cow
dung, bricks, coal, pebbles
and sand. He should also
have other similar substances
that would not decay in
the soil buried as hidden
markers at the intersection
of boundaries.

rT 1
> Would these boundary

markers have been adequate
to resolve disputes?

40 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Source 7 5.4 Land grants and new rural elites
oR. 9 . From the early centuries of the Common Era, we
find grants of land being made, many of which were
The Harshacharita isa biography recorded in inscriptions. Some of these inscriptions
of Harshavardhana, the ruler of were on stone, but most were on copper plates
Kanauj (see Map 3), composed (Fig. 13) which were probably given as a record of
in Sanskrit by his court poet, the transaction to those who received the land. The
Banabhatta (c. seventh century records that have survived are generally about grants
cE). This is an excerpt from to religious institutions or to Brahmanas. Most
the text, an extremely rare inscriptions were in Sanskrit. In some cases, and

representation of life in a especially from the seventh century onwards, part
settlement on the outskirts of a

forest in the Vindhyas:

The outskirts being for the
most part forest, many
parcels of rice-land, threshing
ground and arable land were
being apportioned by small
farmers ... it was mainly
spade culture ... owing to the
difficulty of ploughing the
sparsely scattered fields
covered with grass, with their
few clear spaces, their black
soil stiff as black iron ...

There were people moving
along with bundles of bark ...
countless sacks of plucked
flowers, ... loads of flax and
hemp bundles, quantities
of honey, peacocks’ tail
feathers, wreaths of wax,
logs, and grass. Village wives
hastened en route for
neighbouring villages, all
intent on thoughts of sale and
bearing on their heads
baskets filled with various
gathered forest fruits.

> How would you classify |

l the people described in the
text in terms of their
occupations?

of the inscription was in Sanskrit, while the rest
was in a local language such as Tamil or Telugu.
Let us look at one such inscription more closely.

Prabhavati Gupta was the daughter of one of the
most important rulers in early Indian history,
Chandragupta II (c. 375-415 ce). She was married
into another important ruling family, that of the
Vakatakas, who were powerful in the Deccan (see
Map 3). According to Sanskrit legal texts, women
were not supposed to have independent access to
resources such as land. However, the inscription
indicates that Prabhavati had access to land, which
she then granted. This may have been because she
was a queen (one of the few known from early Indian
history), and her situation was therefore exceptional.
It is also possible that the provisions of legal texts
were not uniformly implemented.

The inscription also gives us an idea about rural
populations - these included Brahmanas and
peasants, as well as others who were expected to
provide a range of produce to the king or his
representatives. And according to the inscription,
they would have to obey the new lord of the village,
and perhaps pay him all these dues.

Land grants such as this one have been found in
several parts of the country. There were regional
variations in the sizes of land donated - ranging
from small plots to vast stretches of uncultivated
land - and the rights given to donees (the recipients
of the grant). The impact of land grants is a subject
of heated debate among historians. Some feel that
land grants were part of a strategy adopted by ruling
lineages to extend agriculture to new areas. Others
suggest that land grants were indicative of
weakening political power: as kings were losing
control over their samantas, they tried to win allies

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS 41

by making grants of land. They also feel that kings
tried to project themselves as supermen (as we saw
in the previous section) because they were losing
control: they wanted to present at least a facade of
power.

Source 8

Prabhavati Gupta and the An agrahara was land granted
village of Danguna

to a Brahmana, who was
usually exempted from paying
land revenue and other dues to
This is what Prabhavati Gupta states in her inscription: the king, and was often given the

Prabhavati Gupta ... commands the gramakutumbinas right to collect these dues from
(householders/peasants living in the village), the local people.
Brahmanas and others living in the village of Danguna

“Be it known to you that on the twelfth (unar day)
of the bright (fortnight) of Karttika, we have, in order
to increase our religious merit donated this village with
the pouring out of water, to the Acharya (teacher)
Chanalasvamin ... You should obey all (his) commands

We confer on (him) the following exemptions typical
of an agrahara ...(this village is) not to be entered by
soldiers and policemen; (it is) exempt from (the
obligation to provide) grass, (animal) hides as seats,
and charcoal (to touring royal officers); exempt from
(the royal prerogative of) purchasing fermenting liquors
and digging (salt); exempt from (the right to) mines
and khadira trees; exempt from (the obligation to
supply) flowers and milk; (it is donated) together with
(the right to) hidden treasures and deposits (and)
together with major and minor taxes ...”

This charter has been written in the thirteenth
(regnal) year. (It has been) engraved by Chakradasa.

Land grants provide some insight into the ;
relationship between cultivators and the state. ~ Discuss...
However, there were people who were often beyond Find out whether plough
the reach of officials or samantas: pastoralists, agriculture, irrigation and
fisherfolk and hunter-gatherers, mobile or semi- transplantation are prevalent
sedentary artisans and shifting cultivators. in your state. If not, are there
Generally, such groups did not keep detailed records any alternative systems in
of their lives and transactions. use?

42

Th

e history of
Pataliputra

Each city had a history of its own.
Pataliputra, for instance,
began as a village known as
Pataligrama. Then, in the fifth
century sce, the Magadhan
rulers decided to shift their
capital from Rajagaha to this
settlement and renamed it. By
the fourth century BCE, it was
the capital of the Mauryan
Empire and one of the largest
cities in Asia. Subsequently,
its importance apparently
declined. When the Chinese
pilgrim Xuan Zang visited the
city in the seventh century cE,
he found it in ruins, and with a
very small population.

Fig. 2.6

The gift of an image

This is part of an image from
Mathura. On the pedestal is a
Prakrit inscription, mentioning
that a woman named Nagapiya,
the wife of a goldsmith (sovanika)
named Dharmaka, installed this
image in a shrine.

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

6. TOWNS AND TRADE

6.1 New cities

Let us retrace our steps back to the urban centres
that emerged in several parts of the subcontinent
from c. sixth century pce. As we have seen, many of
these were capitals of mahajanapadas. Virtually all
major towns were located along routes of
communication. Some such as Pataliputra were on
riverine routes. Others, such as Ujjayini, were along
land routes, and yet others, such as Puhar, were
near the coast, from where sea routes began. Many
cities like Mathura were bustling centres of
commercial, cultural and political activity.

6.2 Urban populations:
Elites and craftspersons

We have seen that kings and ruling elites lived in
fortified cities. Although it is difficult to conduct
extensive excavations at most sites because people
live in these areas even today (unlike the Harappan
cities), a wide range of artefacts have been recovered
from them. These include fine pottery bowls and
dishes, with a glossy finish, known as Northern Black
Polished Ware, probably used by rich people, and
ornaments, tools, weapons, vessels, figurines, made
of a wide range of materials - gold, silver, copper,
bronze, ivory, glass, shell and terracotta.

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

43

Map 3

*Taxila

_SATAVAHANAS

~~ *Dhanyakataka

“CHOLAS

Kodumanale»__ “Puhar

CIES PANDYAS

Sketch map not to scale

Some important kingdoms
and towns

Ai KUSHANAS
fe Z 3 / is .
Kanauj Shravasti’
Mathura" Guptag —waishali
_ Varanasi...» Pataliputra
ay epee : *Rajgir *Mahasthan
= a if | Pcisha Chandraketugarh /
/Ujjayini® | eae i
.
Bharukachchha VINES *
ARABIAN SEA i
ye fi * Shishupalgarh
Sopara® =Paithan © ,

BAY OF BENGAL

FO as |

By the second century scr, we find short votive
inscriptions in a number of cities. These mention
the name of the donor, and sometimes specify his/
her occupation as well. They tell us about people
who lived in towns: washing folk, weavers, scribes,
carpenters, potters, goldsmiths, blacksmiths,
officials, religious teachers, merchants and kings.

Sometimes, guilds or shrenis, organisations of
craft producers and merchants, are mentioned as
well. These guilds probably procured raw
materials, regulated production, and marketed the
finished product. It is likely that craftspersons
used a range of iron tools to meet the growing
demands of urban elites.

| region where the Harappan
civilisation flourished in the
| third millennium BcE?

Votive inscriptions record gifts
made to religious institutions.

| > Were there any cities in the |

44

Source 9

The Malabar coast
(present-day Kerala)

Here is an excerpt from Periplus
of the Erythraean Sea,
composed by an anonymous
Greek sailor (c first century cE):

They G.e. traders from
abroad) send large ships to
these market-towns on
account of the great quantity
and bulk of pepper and
malabathrum (possibly
cinnamon, produced in these
regions). There are imported
here, in the first place, a great
quantity of coin; topaz ...
antimony (a mineral used as
a colouring substance), coral,
crude glass, copper, tin, lead
... There is exported pepper,
which is produced in quantity
in only one region near these
markets ... Besides this there
are exported great quantities
of fine pearls, ivory, silk
cloth, ... transparent stones
of all kinds, diamonds and
sapphires, and tortoise shell.

Archaeological evidence of a
bead-making industry, using
precious and semi-precious
stones, has been found in
Kodumanal (Tamil Nadu). It is
likely that local traders brought
the stones mentioned in the
Periplus from sites such as
these to the coastal ports.

rT TT 1
> Why did the author

_ compile this list?

“Periplus” is a Greek word
meaning sailing around and
“Erythraean” was the Greek
name for the Red Sea.

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

6.3 Trade in the subcontinent and beyond

From the sixth century sce, land and river routes
criss-crossed the subcontinent and extended in
various directions — overland into Central Asia and
beyond, and overseas, from ports that dotted the
coastline - extending across the Arabian Sea to East
and North Africa and West Asia, and through the
Bay of Bengal to Southeast Asia and China. Rulers
often attempted to control these routes, possibly by
offering protection for a price.

Those who traversed these routes included
peddlers who probably travelled on foot and
merchants who travelled with caravans of bullock
carts and pack-animals. Also, there were seafarers,
whose ventures were risky but highly profitable.
Successful merchants, designated as masattuvan
in Tamil and setthis and satthavahas in Prakrit,
could become enormously rich. A wide range of
goods were carried from one place to another - salt,
grain, cloth, metal ores and finished products,
stone, timber, medicinal plants, to name a few.
Spices, especially pepper, were in high demand in
the Roman Empire, as were textiles and medicinal
plants, and these were all transported across the
Arabian Sea to the Mediterranean.

6.4 Coins and kings
To some extent, exchanges were facilitated by the
introduction of coinage. Punch-marked coins made
of silver and copper (c. sixth century Bce onwards)
were amongst the earliest to be minted and used.
These have been recovered from excavations at a
number of sites throughout the subcontinent.
Numismatists have studied these and other coins to
reconstruct possible commercial networks.

Attempts made to identify the symbols on punch-
marked coins with specific ruling dynasties,
including the Mauryas, suggest that these were
issued by kings. It is also likely that merchants,
bankers and townspeople issued some of these coins.
The first coins to bear the names and images of
rulers were issued by the Indo-Greeks, who
established control over the north-western part of
the subcontinent c. second century BcE.

The first gold coins were issued c. first century cE
by the Kushanas. These were virtually identical in
weight with those issued by contemporary Roman

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

emperors and the Parthian rulers of Iran, and have
been found from several sites in north India and
Central Asia. The widespread use of gold coins
indicates the enormous value of the transactions
that were taking place. Besides, hoards of Roman
coins have been found from archaeological sites in
south India. It is obvious that networks of trade were
not confined within political boundaries: south India
was not part of the Roman Empire, but there were
close connections through trade.

Coins were also issued by tribal republics such
as that of the Yaudheyas of Punjab and Haryana
(c. first century ce). Archaeologists have unearthed
several thousand copper coins issued by the
Yaudheyas, pointing to the latter’s interest and
participation in economic exchanges.

Some of the most spectacular gold coins were
issued by the Gupta rulers. The earliest issues
are remarkable for their purity. These coins
facilitated long-distance transactions from which
kings also benefited.

From c. sixth century ce onwards, finds of gold
coins taper off. Does this indicate that there was
some kind of an economic crisis? Historians are
divided on this issue. Some suggest that with the
collapse of the Western Roman Empire long-distance
trade declined, and this affected the prosperity of
the states, communities and regions that had
benefited from it. Others argue that new towns and
networks of trade started emerging around this time.
They also point out that though finds of coins of
that time are fewer, coins continue to be mentioned
in inscriptions and texts. Could it be that there are
fewer finds because coins were in circulation rather
than being hoarded?

Fig. 2.9
A Gupta coin

45

Numismatics is the study of
coins, including visual elements
such as scripts and images,
metallurgical analysis and the
contexts in which they have
been found.

Fig. 2.7
A punch-marked coin, so named
because symbols were punched or
stamped onto the metal surface

Fig. 2.8
A Yaudheya coin

> Discuss...

What are the transactions
involved in trade? Which of
these transactions are
apparent from the sources
mentioned? Are there any
that are not evident from the
sources?

46 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Fig. 2.10 7. BACK TO BASICS

An Asokan inscription

How ARE INSCRIPTIONS DECIPHERED?
So far, we have been studying excerpts from
inscriptions amongst other things. But how do
historians find out what is written on them?

7.1 Deciphering Brahmi
Most scripts used to write modern Indian languages

red are derived from Brahmi, the script used in most

Asokan inscriptions. From the late eighteenth
century, European scholars aided by Indian pandits
worked backwards from contemporary Bengali
and Devanagari (the script used to write Hindi)
manuscripts, comparing their letters with older
specimens.

Scholars who studied early inscriptions sometimes
assumed these were in Sanskrit, although the
earliest inscriptions were, in fact, in Prakrit. It was
only after decades of painstaking investigations by
several epigraphists that James Prinsep was able to

ae (OS [SEIN | |

Fig. 2.11 : _
Asokan Brahmi with Devanagari decipher Asokan Brahmi in 1838.

equivalents 7.2 How Kharosthi was read
CLT 1 The story of the decipherment of Kharosthi, the script

| > Do some Devanagari letters |
| appear similar to Brahmi? Are |
| there any that seem different? |

used in inscriptions in the northwest, is different.
Here, finds of coins of Indo-Greek kings who ruled
over the area (c. second-first centuries sce) have

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

facilitated matters. These coins contain the names
of kings written in Greek and Kharosthi scripts.
European scholars who could read the former
compared the letters. For instance, the symbol
for “a” could be found in both scripts for writing
names such as Apollodotus. With Prinsep identifying
the language of the Kharosthi inscriptions as Prakrit,
it became possible to read longer inscriptions as well.

7.3 Historical evidence from inscriptions
To find out how epigraphists and historians work,
let us look at two Asokan inscriptions more closely.

Note that the name of the ruler, Asoka, is not
mentioned in the inscription (Source 10). What is
used instead are titles adopted by the ruler -
devanampiya, often translated as “beloved of the
gods” and piyadassi, or “pleasant to behold”. The
name Asoka is mentioned in some other inscriptions,
which also contain these titles. After examining all
these inscriptions, and finding that they match in
terms of content, style, language and palaeography,
epigraphists have concluded that they were issued
by the same ruler.

You may also have noticed that Asoka claims that
earlier rulers had no arrangements to receive reports.
If you consider the political history of the
subcontinent prior to Asoka, do you think this
statement is true? Historians have to constantly
assess statements made in inscriptions to judge
whether they are true, plausible or exaggerations.

Did you notice that there are words within
brackets? Epigraphists sometimes add these to make
the meaning of sentences clear. This has to be done
carefully, to ensure that the intended meaning of
the author is not changed.

Source 10

A7

The orders of the king

Thus speaks king Devanampiya

Piyadassi:

In the past, there were no
arrangements for disposing
affairs, nor for receiving
regular reports. But I
have made the following
(arrangement). Pativedakas
should report to me about the
affairs of the people at all
times, anywhere, whether I
am eating, in the inner
apartment, in the bedroom,
in the cow pen, being carried
(possibly in a palanquin), or
in the garden. And | will
dispose of the affairs of the
people everywhere.
r
| > Epigraphists have
translated the term
pativedaka as reporter.
In what ways would the
functions of the
pativedaka have been
different from those we
generally associate with
reporters today?

Fig. 2.12
A coin of the Indo-Greek king
Menander

48

Source 11

The anguish of the king

When the king Devanampiya
Piyadassi had been ruling
for eight years, the (country
of the) Kalingas (present-
day coastal Orissa) was
conquered by (him).

One hundred and fifty
thousand men were deported,
a hundred thousand were
killed, and many more died.

After that, now that (the
country of) the Kalingas has
been taken, Devanampiya (is
devoted) to an intense study
of Dhamma, to the love of
Dhamma, and to instructing
(the people) in Dhamma.

This is the repentance of
Devanampiya on account of
his conquest of the (country
of the) Kalingas.

For this is considered very
painful and deplorable
by Devanampiya that,
while one is conquering
an unconquered (country)
slaughter, death and
deportation of people (take
place) there ...

~> Discuss...

Look at Map 2 and discuss
the location of Asokan
inscriptions. Do you notice
any patterns?

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Historians have to make other assessments as
well. If a king’s orders were inscribed on natural
rocks near cities or important routes of
communication, would passers-by have stopped to
read these? Most people were probably not literate.
Did everybody throughout the subcontinent
understand the Prakrit used in Pataliputra? Would
the orders of the king have been followed? Answers
to such questions are not always easy to find.

Some of these problems are evident if we look at
an Asokan inscription (Source 11), which has often
been interpreted as reflecting the anguish of the
ruler, as well as marking a change in his attitude
towards warfare. As we shall see, the situation
becomes more complex once we move beyond reading
the inscription at face value.

While Asokan inscriptions have been found in
present-day Orissa, the one depicting his anguish
is missing. In other words, the inscription has not
been found in the region that was conquered. What
are we to make of that? Is it that the anguish of the
recent conquest was too painful in the region, and
therefore the ruler was unable to address the issue?

8. THE LIMITATIONS OF INSCRIPTIONAL

EVIDENCE

By now it is probably evident that there are limits to
what epigraphy can reveal. Sometimes, there are
technical limitations: letters are very faintly
engraved, and thus reconstructions are uncertain.
Also, inscriptions may be damaged or letters missing.
Besides, it is not always easy to be sure about the
exact meaning of the words used in inscriptions,
some of which may be specific to a particular place
or time. If you go through an epigraphical journal
(some are listed in Timeline 2), you will realise that
scholars are constantly debating and discussing
alternative ways of reading inscriptions.

Although several thousand inscriptions have been
discovered, not all have been deciphered, published
and translated. Besides, many more inscriptions
must have existed, which have not survived the
ravages of time. So what is available at present is
probably only a fraction of what was inscribed.

There is another, perhaps more fundamental,
problem: not everything that we may consider

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

politically or economically significant was necessarily
recorded in inscriptions. For instance, routine
agricultural practices and the joys and sorrows of
daily existence find no mention in inscriptions, which
focus, more often than not, on grand, unique events.
Besides, the content of inscriptions almost invariably
projects the perspective of the person(s) who
commissioned them. As such, they need to be
juxtaposed with other perspectives so as to arrive at
a better understanding of the past.

Thus epigraphy alone does not provide a full
understanding of political and economic history. Also,
historians often question both old and new evidence.
Scholars in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries were primarily interested in the histories
of kings. From the mid-twentieth century onwards,
issues such as economic change, and the ways in
which different social groups emerged have assumed
far more importance. Recent decades have seen a
much greater preoccupation with histories of
marginalised groups. This will probably lead to fresh
investigations of old sources, and the development
of new strategies of analysis.

49

Fig. 2.13
A copperplate inscription from
Karnataka, c. sixth century cE

50 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

4 >

TIMELINE 1
MAJOR POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

c.600-500 BcE Paddy transplantation; urbanisation in the
Ganga valley; mahajanapadas; punch-marked coins

c. 500-400 BcE Rulers of Magadha consolidate power

c. 327-325 BCE Invasion of Alexander of Macedon

c. 321 BCE Accession of Chandragupta Maurya

c. 272/268-2311 BCE Reign of Asoka

c. 185 BCE End of the Mauryan empire

c. 200-100 BcE Indo-Greek rule in the northwest; Cholas, Cheras

and Pandyas in south India; Satavahanas in the Deccan

c. 100 BcE-200 cE Shaka (peoples from Central Asia) rulers in
the northwest; Roman trade; gold coinage

c. 78 CE? Accession of Kanishka

c.100-200 cE Earliest inscriptional evidence of land
grants by Satavahana and Shaka rulers

c. 320 cE Beginning of Gupta rule

c. 335-375 cE Samudragupta

c. 375-415 ce Chandragupta II; Vakatakas in the Deccan

c. 500-600 cE Rise of the Chalukyas in Karnataka and of the Pallavas

in Tamil Nadu

c. 606-647 cE Harshavardhana king of Kanauj; Chinese pilgrim
Xuan Zang comes in search of Buddhist texts

c. 712 Arabs conquer Sind

(Note: It is difficult to date economic developments precisely. Also, there are enormous
subcontinental variations which have not been indicated in the timeline.
Only the earliest dates for specific developments have been given. The date of Kanishka’s

Nae SSiain is not certain and this has been marked with a‘?’) Dy,

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS

Si

(7

TIMELINE 2
MAJOR ADVANCES IN EPIGRAPHY
Eighteenth century
1784 Founding of the Asiatic Society (Bengal)

Nineteenth century

1810s Colin Mackenzie collects over 8,000 inscriptions in
Sanskrit and Dravidian languages

1838 Decipherment of Asokan Brahmi by James Prinsep

1877 Alexander Cunningham publishes a set of Asokan
inscriptions

1886 First issue of Epigraphia Carnatica, a journal of south

Indian inscriptions

1888 First issue of Epigraphia Indica

Twentieth century

1965-66 D.C. Sircar publishes Indian Epigraphy and Indian
Epigraphical Glossary

ANSWER IN 100-150 WORDS

1. Discuss the evidence of craft production in Early
Historic cities. In what ways is this different from
the evidence from Harappan cities?

Describe the salient features of mahajanapadas.

How do historians reconstruct the lives of
ordinary people?

4. Compare and contrast the list of things given to
the Pandyan chief (Source 3) with those produced
in the village of Danguna (Source 8). Do you
notice any similarities or differences?

5. List some of the problems faced by epigraphists.

52

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

6.

7.

Lid “
If you would like to know

more, read: 9.

D.N. Jha. 2004.
Early India: A Concise Histor y.
Manohar, New Delhi.

R. Salomon. 1998.

Indian Epigraphy .Munshiram 10.

Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd,

WRITE A SHORT ESSAY (ABOUT
500 WORDS) ON THE FOLLOWING:

Discuss the main features of Mauryan
administration. Which of these elements are evident
in the Asokan inscriptions that you have studied?

This is a statement made by one of the best-known
epigraphists of the twentieth century, D.C. Sircar:
“There is no aspect of life, culture and activities of
the Indians that is not reflected in inscriptions.”
Discuss.

Discuss the notions of kingship that developed in the
post-Mauryan period.

To what extent were agricultural practices
transformed in the period under consideration?

[| MAP WORK

Compare Maps 1 and 2, and list the mahajanapadas
that might have been included in the Mauryan

New Delhi. Empire. Are any Asokan inscriptions found in these
areas?
R.S. Sharma. 1983.
Material Culture and Social
Formation in Early India. | PROJECT (ANY ONE)
Macmillan, New Delhi. =
11. Collect newspapers for one month. Cut and paste all

D.C. Sircar. 1975.

Inscriptions of Asoka.
Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting,
Government of India, New Delhi.

Romila Thapar. 1997.

Asoka and the Decline of the
Mauryas. Oxford University Press,
New Delhi.

For more information,

you could visit:
http:/projectsouthasia.sdstate.
edu/Docs/index.html

12.

the statements made by government officials about
public works. Note what the reports say about the
resources required for such projects, how the
resources are mobilised and the objective of the
project. Who issues these statements, and how and
why are they communicated? Compare and contrast
these with the evidence from inscriptions discussed
in this chapter. What are the similarities and
differences that you notice?

Collect five different kinds of currency notes and coins
in circulation today. For each one of these, describe
what you see on the obverse and the reverse (the front
and the back). Prepare a report on the common
features as well as the differences in terms of pictures,
scripts and languages, size, shape and any other
element that you find significant. Compare these with
the coins shown in this chapter, discussing the
materials used, the techniques of minting, the visual
symbols and their significance and the possible
functions that coins may have had.

THEME KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS
THREE EARLY SOCIETIES

In the previous chapter we saw that there were several
changes in economic and political life between c. 600
BcE and 600 ce. Some of these changes influenced societies
as well. For instance, the extension of agriculture into
forested areas transformed the lives of forest dwellers;
craft specialists often emerged as distinct social groups;
the unequal distribution of wealth sharpened social
differences.

Historians often use textual
traditions to understand these
processes. Some texts lay down
norms of social behaviour; others
describe and occasionally comment
on a wide range of social situations
and practices. We can also catch a
glimpse of some social actors from
inscriptions. As we will see, each
text (and inscription) was written
from the perspective of specific
social categories. So we need to
keep in mind who composed what
and for whom. We also need to
consider the language used, and
the ways in which the text
circulated. Used carefully, texts allow us to piece together
attitudes and practices that shaped social histories.

In focusing on the Mahabharata, a colossal epic running
in its present form into over 100,000 verses with depictions
of a wide range of social categories and situations, we draw
on one of the richest texts of the subcontinent. It was
composed over a period of about 1,000 years (c. 500 BcE
onwards), and some of the stories it contains may have
been in circulation even earlier. The central story is about
two sets of warring cousins. The text also contains sections
laying down norms of behaviour for various social groups.
Occasionally (though not always), the principal characters
seem to follow these norms. What does conformity with
norms and deviations from them signify?

(c. 6OO BCE-6OO cE)

Fig. 3.1

A terracotta sculpture
depicting a scene from
the Mahabharata
(West Bengal),

c. seventeenth century

54

aaa [2 19. 19
| antarat aePt Gaard aaa |
Rivets Brataedt acrdahtaiaa: i te
fat afage oy guard guar |

abit Weaaieg Fad qulateag ll Re
fageaightiisiearaney |

| aera red eyr gt warm ey EE

— ({L

arangare). ]

| 17 Gam. 17 (of ¥.
(for the firat time) aft
— *) Bh a gift; Do (fire
— *) Ke Bi Vi Beas Deo Sepp § (KE
Sersid) Bo Ds Gia) M py pid; Du (second

time) Stee 8 Dr Set es Gs Sereret (fo Sener).
1 tl ; Cv perhaps

) Das ; Ti aprgyy (for

Dao Cn read 179°

aq; 5 (Ga om.)
verge (for xappaa). is paaanad (tic); Ba
at cyyraa; Do (f tims) Seretecamry,
— *) & Ku fergtdray Das areata; Ge oredr; Cv as
intext, $1 K Biss 0 (oxcept Di») gana; Ge

mer mgt; Cv as in t ) BD (except Da)
Gua M qenda fa"; Cy os in text,

18 Gs om. I8 (ef. vl. 16). — *) Gs fire (for
Fett). Ga for age). Ge ght farge sa.
—*) & & iB D Gs: gapeqa’. — *) Bis
fed (for hee), Gi Ka preqeidr, Be-a Da Da-a
wravretar; Ga spagoyrei; Cv as in text, — *) Va
gue ( for eer)

19 *) Dus agfirg. Da array; Da ara (for

fpr). — *) Vi Be Da Ta Os fygeq; Cv os in

Si Ka equrrag; Vi Be Loa )fieae’s ; Ba Dia
[a ]ficgra’; Mtr [ a Jewqrernag; Cr an in te a
sererareta, — *) Bos fafaart; |
re) fi dam; V2 B Doz Daeg
| a Mz) wg (for egr). —*) Tr Ga-o d
ast (for gt), EK Bs Dus wiRfing et Vi Bas

daware (for afafaga). Ba qe (for oq). o
waar. — 8 ¥
Dn (1) Da (transposing

(nee variants below ):

105]

Fig. 3.2

A section of a page from the Critical

Edition

The section printed in large bold
letters is part of the main text.
The smaller print lists variations
in different manuscripts, which
were carefully catalogued.

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

1. THE CRITICAL EDITION OF THE

MAHABHARATA

One of the most ambitious projects of scholarship
began in 1919, under the leadership of a noted Indian
Sanskritist, V.S. Sukthankar. A team comprising
dozens of scholars initiated the task of preparing a
critical edition of the Mahabharata. What exactly did
this involve? Initially, it meant collecting Sanskrit
manuscripts of the text, written in a variety of
scripts, from different parts of the country.

The team worked out a method of comparing
verses from each manuscript. Ultimately, they
selected the verses that appeared common to most
versions and published these in several volumes,
running into over 13,000 pages. The project took 47
years to complete. Two things became apparent: there
were several common elements in the Sanskrit
versions of the story, evident in manuscripts found
all over the subcontinent, from Kashmir and Nepal
in the north to Kerala and Tamil Nadu in the south.
Also evident were enormous regional variations in
the ways in which the text had been transmitted
over the centuries. These variations were
documented in footnotes and appendices to the main
text. Taken together, more than half the 13,000 pages
are devoted to these variations.

In a sense, these variations are reflective of the
complex processes that shaped early (and later)
social histories - through dialogues between
dominant traditions and resilient local ideas and
practices. These dialogues are characterised by
moments of conflict as well as consensus.

Our understanding of these processes is derived
primarily from texts written in Sanskrit by and for
Brahmanas. When issues of social history were
explored for the first time by historians in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, they tended to
take these texts at face value - believing that
everything that was laid down in these texts was
actually practised. Subsequently, scholars began
studying other traditions, from works in Pali, Prakrit
and Tamil. These studies indicated that the ideas
contained in normative Sanskrit texts were on the
whole recognised as authoritative: they were also
questioned and occasionally even rejected. It is
important to keep this in mind as we examine how
historians reconstruct social histories.

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS

2. KINSHIP AND MARRIAGE
MANY RULES AND VARIED PRACTICES

2.1 Finding out about families

We often take family life for granted. However, you
may have noticed that not all families are identical:
they vary in terms of numbers of members, their
relationship with one another as well as the kinds
of activities they share. Often people belonging to
the same family share food and other resources,
and live, work and perform rituals together. Families
are usually parts of larger networks of people
defined as relatives, or to use a more technical term,
kinfolk. While familial ties are often regarded as
“natural” and based on blood, they are defined in
many different ways. For instance, some societies
regard cousins as being blood relations, whereas
others do not.

For early societies, historians can retrieve
information about elite families fairly easily; it is,
however, far more difficult to reconstruct the familial
relationships of ordinary people. Historians also
investigate and analyse attitudes towards family and
kinship. These are important, because they provide
an insight into people’s thinking; it is likely that
some of these ideas would have shaped their actions,
just as actions may have led to changes in attitudes.

2.2 The ideal of patriliny
Can we identify points when kinship relations
changed? At one level, the Mahabharata is a story
about this. It describes a feud over land and power
between two groups of cousins, the Kauravas and
the Pandavas, who belonged to a single ruling family,
that of the Kurus, a lineage dominating one of the
janapadas (Chapter 2, Map 1). Ultimately, the
conflict ended in a battle, in which the Pandavas
emerged victorious. After that, patrilineal succession
was proclaimed. While patriliny had existed prior to
the composition of the epic, the central story of the
Mahabharata reinforced the idea that it was valuable.
Under patriliny, sons could claim the resources
(including the throne in the case of kings) of their
fathers when the latter died.

Most ruling dynasties (c. sixth century pce onwards)
claimed to follow this system, although there were
variations in practice: sometimes there were no sons,

55

T

erms for family
and kin

Sanskrit texts use the term kila
to designate families and yeti
for the larger network of kinfolk.
The term vamsha is used for
lineage.

Patriliny means tracing descent
from father to son, grandson
and so on.

Matriliny is the term used when
descent is traced through the
mother.

56 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

]
if

Map 1
® Hastinapura The Kuru Panchala region and neighbouring areas

KURU

® Indraprastha
SAKYA

SHURASENA : io) i Kapilavastu
— a

oz Shravasti far,
*Virata ® Mathura - ‘@ MALLA ® Lumbini

\ < s f
é KOSHALA FEN
MATSYA : 5,

KZ
KS

a s i
® Ayodhya Kushinagara
|» Vaishali

, VATSA : i
“ Sarath os elevate)

ia: s ;
Kaushambi ~ ued

® Bodh Gaya

*Ujjayini
AVANTI Sketch map not to scale

in some situations brothers succeeded one another,
sometimes other kinsmen claimed the throne, and,
in very exceptional circumstances, women such as
Prabhavati Gupta (Chapter 2) exercised power.

The concern with patriliny was not unique to ruling
families. It is evident in mantras in ritual texts such
as the Rigveda. It is possible that these attitudes
were shared by wealthy men and those who claimed
high status, including Brahmanas.

Source 1

Producing “fine sons”

Here is an excerpt of a mantra from the Rigveda, which was probably inserted
in the text ¢ 1000 Bcz, to be chanted by the priest while conducting the marriage
ritual. It is used in many Hindu weddings even today:

I free her from here, but not from there. I have bound her firmly there, so
that through the grace of Indra she will have fine sons and be fortunate in
her husband’s love.

Indra was one of the principal deities, a god of valour, warfare and rain.
“Here” and “there” refer to the father’s and husband’s house respectively.

> In the context of the mantra, discuss the implications of marriage
l from the point of view of the bride and groom. Are the implications
f identical, or are there differences?

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS
Source 2

Why kinfolk quarrelled

This is an excerpt from the Adi Parvan (literally, the first
section) of the Sanskrit Mahabharata, describing why

57

conflicts arose amongst the Kauravas and Pandavas:

The Kauravas were the ... sons of Dhritarashtra, and
the Pandavas ... were their cousins. Since Dhritarashtra
was blind, his younger brother Pandu ascended the
throne of Hastinapura (see Map 1) ... However, after
the premature death of Pandu, Dhritarashtra became
king, as the royal princes were still very young. As the
princes grew up together, the citizens of Hastinapura
began to express their preference for the Pandavas,
for they were more capable and virtuous than the
Kauravas. This made Duryodhana, the eldest of the
Kauravas, jealous. He approached his father and said,
“You yourself did not receive the throne, although it
fell to you, because of your defect. If the Pandava

> Read the passage and list

the different criteria suggested

for becoming king. Of these,
how important was birth ina
particular family? Which of
these criteria seem justified?
Are there any that strike you
as unjust?

receives the patrimony from Pandu, his son will surely 4
inherit it in turn, and so will his son, and his. We
ourselves with our sons shall be excluded from the royal
succession and become of slight regard in the eyes of
the world, lord of the earth!”

Passages such as these may not have been literally true,
but they give us an idea about what those who wrote the
text thought. Sometimes, as in this case, they contain
conflicting ideas.

2.3 Rules of marriage
While sons were important for the continuity of the
patrilineage, daughters were viewed rather
differently within this framework. They had no claims
to the resources of the household. At the same time,
marrying them into families outside the kin was
considered desirable. This system, called exogamy
(literally, marrying outside), meant that the lives of
young girls and women belonging to families that
claimed high status were often carefully regulated
to ensure that they were married at the “right” time
and to the “right” person. This gave rise to the belief
that kanyadana or the gift of a daughter in marriage
was an important religious duty of the father.

With the emergence of new towns (Chapter 2),
social life became more complex. People from near

Types of marriages

Endogamy refers to marriage
within a unit - this could be a
kin group, caste, or a group
living in the same locality.

Exogamy refers to marriage
outside the unit.

Polygyny is the practice of
aman having several wives.

Polyandry is the practice of
a woman having several
husbands.

58

Source 3

Eight forms of marriage

Here are the first, fourth, fifth
and sixth forms of marriage
from the Manusmriti:

First: The gift of a daughter,
after dressing her in costly
clothes and honouring her
with presents of jewels, to
a man learned in the
Veda whom the father
himself invites.

Fourth: The gift of a
daughter by the father after
he has addressed the couple
with the text, “May both of
you perform your duties
together”, and has shown
honour to the bridegroom.

Fifth: When the bridegroom
receives a maiden, after having
given as much wealth as he
can afford to the kinsmen and
to the bride herself, according
to his own will.

Sixth: The voluntary union

of a maiden and her lover

which springs from
desire ...

> For each of the forms,
discuss whether the
decision about the
marriage was taken by
(a) the bride,

(b) the bridegroom,

(c) the father of the bride,
(d) the father of the
bridegroom,

(e) any other person.

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

and far met to buy and sell their products and share
ideas in the urban milieu. This may have led to a
questioning of earlier beliefs and practices (see also
Chapter 4). Faced with this challenge, the
Brahmanas responded by laying down codes of social
behaviour in great detail. These were meant to be
followed by Brahmanas in particular and the rest of
society in general. From c. 500 sce, these norms were
compiled in Sanskrit texts known as _ the
Dharmasutras and Dharmashastras. The most
important of such works, the Manusmriti, was
compiled between c. 200 Bce and 200 cE.

While the Brahmana authors of these texts
claimed that their point of view had universal validity
and that what they prescribed had to be obeyed by
everybody, it is likely that real social relations were
more complicated. Besides, given the regional
diversity within the subcontinent and the difficulties
of communication, the influence of Brahmanas was
by no means all-pervasive.

What is interesting is that the Dharmasutras and
Dharmashastras recognised as many as eight forms
of marriage. Of these, the first four were considered
as “good” while the remaining were condemned. It is
possible that these were practised by those who did
not accept Brahmanical norms.

2.4 The gotra of women

One Brahmanical practice, evident from c. 1000 BcE
onwards, was to classify people (especially
Brahmanas) in terms of gotras. Each gotra was named
after a Vedic seer, and all those who belonged to the
same gotra were regarded as his descendants. Two
rules about gotra were particularly important:
women were expected to give up their father’s gotra
and adopt that of their husband on marriage and
members of the same gotra could not marry.

One way to find out whether this was commonly
followed is to consider the names of men and women,
which were sometimes derived from gotra names.
These names are available for powerful ruling
lineages such as the Satavahanas who ruled over
parts of western India and the Deccan (c. second
century BcEe-second century ce). Several of their
inscriptions have been recovered, which allow
historians to trace family ties, including marriages.

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS 59

Source 4

Names of Satavahana kings
from inscriptions

These are the names of several generations of
Satavahana rulers, recovered from inscriptions. Note
the uniform title »ja. Also note the following word,
which ends with the term puta, a Prakrit word meaning
“son”. The term Gotami-puta means “son of Gotami”.
Names like Gotami and Vasithi are feminine forms of
Gotama and Vasistha, Vedic seers after whom gctras
were named.

raja Gotami-puta Siri-Satakani

raja Vasithi-puta (sami-) Siri-Pulumayi
raja Gotami-puta sami-Siri-Yana-Satakani
raja Madhari-puta svami-Sakasena

raja Vasathi-puta Chatarapana-Satakani

ee 4
raja Hariti-puta Vinhukada > How many Gotami-putas and |
Chutukulanamda-Satakamni how many Vasithi (alternative

. a) 5
raja Gotami-puta Siri-Vijaya- Satakani Sjaelihng Wessetsal) | outeas anne ness |

Fig. 3.3

A Satavahana ruler and his wife
This is one of the rare sculptural
depictions of a ruler from the wall
of a cave donated to Buddhist
monks. This sculpture dates to

c. second century BCE.

~—N

Metronymics in the
Upanishads

The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad,
one of the earliest Upanishads
(see also Chapter 4), contains a
list of successive generations of
teachers and students, many of
whom were designated by
metronymics.

60

Source 5

A mother’s advice

The Mahabharata describes how,
when war between the Kauravas
and the Pandavas became
almost inevitable, Gandhari
made one last appeal to her
eldest son Duryodhana:

By making peace you honour
your father and me, as well
as your well-wishers ... it is
the wise man in contro] of his
senses who guards his
kingdom. Greed and anger
drag a man away from his
profits; by defeating these
two enemies a king conquers
the earth ... You will happily
enjoy the earth, my son,
along with the wise and
heroic Pandavas ... There is
no good in a war, no law
(dharma) and profit (artha),
let alone happiness; nor is
there (necessarily) victory in
the end - don't set your mind
on war ...

Duryodhana did not listen to

this advice and fought and lost
the war.

-
|

> Does this passage give |
you an idea about the |
way in which mothers

were viewed in early |

Indian societies?

>

Discuss...

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Some of the Satavahana rulers were polygynous
(that is, had more than one wife). An examination of
the names of women who married Satavahana rulers
indicates that many of them had names derived from
gotras such as Gotama and Vasistha, their father’s
gotras. They evidently retained these names instead
of adopting names derived from their husband’s gotra
name as they were required to do according to the
Brahmanical rules. What is also apparent is that
some of these women belonged to the same gotra. As
is obvious, this ran counter to the ideal of exogamy
recommended in the Brahmanical texts. In fact, it
exemplified an alternative practice, that of endogamy
or marriage within the kin group, which was (and
is) prevalent amongst several communities in south
India. Such marriages amongst kinfolk (such as
cousins) ensured a close-knit community.

It is likely that there were variations in other parts
of the subcontinent as well, but as yet it has not
been possible to reconstruct specific details.

2.5 Were mothers important?

We have seen that Satavahana rulers were identified
through metronymics (names derived from that of
the mother). Although this may suggest that mothers
were important, we need to be cautious before we
arrive at any conclusion. In the case of the
Satavahanas we know that succession to the throne
was generally patrilineal.

Fig. 3.4

A battle scene

This is amongst the earliest sculptural depictions of a
scene from the Mahabharata, a terracotta sculpture from
the walls of a temple in Ahichchhatra (Uttar Pradesh),

ce. fifth century cE.

How are children named
today? Are these ways of
naming similar to or different
from those described in this
section?

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS

3. SOCIAL DIFFERENCES:
WITHIN AND BEYOND THE FRAMEWORK

OF CASTE

You are probably familiar with the term caste, which
refers to a set of hierarchically ordered social
categories. The ideal order was laid down in the
Dharmasutras and Dharmashastras. Brahmanas
claimed that this order, in which they were ranked
first, was divinely ordained, while placing groups
classified as Shudras and “untouchables” at the very
bottom of the social order. Positions within the order
were supposedly determined by birth.

3.1 The “right” occupation

The Dharmasutras and Dharmashastras also
contained rules about the ideal “occupations” of the
four categories or varnas. Brahmanas were supposed
to study and teach the Vedas, perform sacrifices and
get sacrifices performed, and give and receive gifts.
Kshatriyas were to engage in warfare, protect people
and administer justice, study the Vedas, get
sacrifices performed, and make gifts. The last three
“occupations” were also assigned to the Vaishyas,
who were in addition expected to engage in
agriculture, pastoralism and trade. Shudras were
assigned only one occupation - that of serving the
three “higher” varnas.

The Brahmanas evolved two or three strategies
for enforcing these norms. One, as we have just seen,
was to assert that the varna order was of divine
origin. Second, they advised kings to ensure that
these norms were followed within their kingdoms.
And third, they attempted to persuade people that
their status was determined by birth. However, this
was not always easy. So prescriptions were often
reinforced by stories told in the Mahabharata and
other texts.

61

Source 6

A divine order?

To justify their claims,
Brahmanas often cited a verse
from a hymn in the Rigveda
known as the Purusha sukta,
describing the sacrifice of
Purusha, the primeval man. All
the elements of the universe,
including the four social
categories, were supposed to
have emanated from his body:

The Brahmana was his
mouth, of his arms was made
the Kshatriya.

His thighs became the
Vaishya, of his feet the
Shudra was born.

CT TT TTT 1

| > Why do you think the
Brahmanas quoted this

| verse frequently? |

62

> What message do you think
this story was meant to convey
to the nishadas?

What message would it convey
to Kshatriyas?

Do you think that Drona, asa
Brahmana, was acting
according to the Dharmasutras
when he was teaching archery?

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Source 7

“Proper” social roles

Here is a story from the Adi Parvan of the Mahabharata:

Once Drona, a Brahmana who taught archery to the
Kuru princes, was approached by Ekalavya, a forest-
dwelling nishaca (a hunting community). When Drona,
who knew the dharma, refused to have him as his pupil,
Ekalavya returned to the forest, prepared an image of
Drona out of clay, and treating it as his teacher, began
to practise on his own. In due course, he acquired
great skill in archery. One day, the Kuru princes went
hunting and their dog, wandering in the woods, came
upon Ekalavya. When the dog smelt the dark nishada
wrapped in black deer skin, his body caked with dirt,
it began to bark. Annoyed, Ekalavya shot seven arrows
into its mouth. When the dog returned to the Pandavas,
they were amazed at this superb display of archery.
They tracked down Ekalavya, who introduced himself
as a pupil of Drona.

Drona had once told his favourite student Arjuna,
that he would be unrivalled amongst his pupils. Arjuna
now reminded Drona about this. Drona approached
Ekalavya, who immediately acknowledged and
honoured him as his teacher. When Drona demanded
his right thumb as his fee, Ekalavya unhesitatingly cut
it off and offered it. But thereafter, when he shot with
his remaining fingers, he was no longer as fast as he
had been before. Thus, Drona kept his word: no one
was better than Arjuna.

3.2 Non-Kshatriya kings
According to the Shastras, only Kshatriyas could be
kings. However, several important ruling lineages
probably had different origins. The social background
of the Mauryas, who ruled over a large empire, has
been hotly debated. While later Buddhist texts
suggested they were Kshatriyas, Brahmanical texts
described them as being of “low” origin. The Shungas
and Kanvas, the immediate successors of the
Mauryas, were Brahmanas. In fact, political power
was effectively open to anyone who could muster
support and resources, and rarely depended on birth
as a Kshatriya.

Other rulers, such as the Shakas who came
from Central Asia, were regarded as mlechchhas,

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS

barbarians or outsiders by the Brahmanas. However,
one of the earliest inscriptions in Sanskrit describes
how Rudradaman, the best-known Shaka ruler
(c. second century ce), rebuilt Sudarshana lake
(Chapter 2). This suggests that powerful mlechchhas
were familiar with Sanskritic traditions.

It is also interesting that the best-known ruler of
the Satavahana dynasty, Gotami-puta Siri-Satakani,
claimed to be both a unique Brahmana (eka
bamhana) and a destroyer of the pride of Kshatriyas.
He also claimed to have ensured that there was no
intermarriage amongst members of the four varnas.
At the same time, he entered into a marriage alliance
with the kin of Rudradaman.

As you can see from this example, integration
within the framework of caste was often a
complicated process. The Satavahanas claimed to
be Brahmanas, whereas according to the
Brahmanas, kings ought to have been Kshatriyas.
They claimed to uphold the fourfold varna order, but
entered into marriage alliances with people who were
supposed to be excluded from the system. And, as
we have seen, they practised endogamy instead of
the exogamous system recommended in the
Brahmanical texts.

3.3 Jatis and social mobility

These complexities are reflected in another term used
in texts to refer to social categories - jati. In
Brahmanical theory, jati, like varna, was based on
birth. However, while the number of varnas was fixed
at four, there was no restriction on the number of
jatis. In fact, whenever Brahmanical authorities
encountered new groups — for instance, people living
in forests such as the nishadas — or wanted to assign
a name to occupational categories such as the
goldsmith or suvarnakara, which did not easily fit
into the fourfold varna system, they classified them
as a jati. Jatis which shared a common occupation
or profession were sometimes organised into shrenis
or guilds.

We seldom come across documents that record
the histories of these groups. But there are
exceptions. One interesting stone inscription (c. fifth
century cE), found in Mandasor (Madhya Pradesh),
records the history of a guild of silk weavers who
originally lived in Lata (Gujarat), from where they

63

Fig. 3.5
Silver coin depicting a Shaka ruler,
c. fourth century CE

64

f The case of the

merchants

Sanskrit texts and inscriptions
used the term vanik to designate
merchants. While trade was
defined as an occupation for
Vaishyas in the Shastras, a
more complex situation is
evident in plays such as the
Mrichchhakatika written by
Shudraka (c fourth century cE),
Here, the hero Charudatta was
described as both a Brahmana
and a sarthavaha or merchant
And a fifth-century inscription
describes two brothers who
made a donation for the
construction of a temple as

pore ee

| Do you think the silk

| Weavers were following the
occupation laid down for them

| in the Shastras?

eee

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

migrated to Mandasor, then known as Dashapura.
It states that they undertook the difficult journey
along with their children and kinfolk, as they had
heard about the greatness of the local king, and
wanted to settle in his kingdom.

The inscription provides a fascinating glimpse of
complex social processes and provides insights into
the nature of guilds or shrenis. Although membership
was based on a shared craft specialisation, some
members adopted other occupations. It also indicates
that the members shared more than a common
profession — they collectively decided to invest their
wealth, earned through their craft, to construct a
splendid temple in honour of the sun god.

Source 8

What the silk weavers did

Here is an excerpt from the inscription, which is
in Sanskrit:

Some are intensely attached to music (so) pleasing to

the ear; others, being proud of (the authorship of) a

hundred excellent biographies, are conversant with

‘1 wonderful tales; (others), filled with humility, are

| absorbed in excellent religious discourses; ... some excel

| in their own religious rites; likewise by others, who were

self-possessed, the science of (Vedic) astronomy was

| mastered; and others, valorous in battle, even today
= forcibly cause harm to the enemies.

3.4 Beyond the four varnas: Integration

Given the diversity of the subcontinent, there were,
and always have been, populations whose social
practices were not influenced by Brahmanical ideas.
When they figure in Sanskrit texts, they are often
described as odd, uncivilised, or even animal-like.
In some instances, these included forest-dwellers -
for whom hunting and gathering remained an
important means of subsistence. Categories such
as the nishada, to which Ekalavya is supposed to
have belonged, are examples of this.

Others who were viewed with suspicion included
populations such as nomadic pastoralists, who could
not be easily accommodated within the framework
of settled agriculturists. Sometimes those who spoke
non-Sanskritic languages were labelled as

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS 65

mlechchhas and looked down upon. There was
nonetheless also a sharing of ideas and beliefs
between these people. The nature of relations is
evident in some stories in the Mahabharata.

Source 9

A tiger-like husband

This is a summary of a story from the Adi Parvan of the
Mahabharata:

The Pandavas had fled into the forest. They were tired
and fell asleep; only Bhima, the second Pandava,
renowned for his prowess, was keeping watch. A
man-eating rakshasa caught the scent of the Pandavas
and sent his sister Hidimba to capture them. She fell in
love with Bhima, transformed herself into a lovely
maiden and proposed to him. He refused. Meanwhile,
the rakshasa arrived and challenged Bhima to a
wrestling match. Bhima accepted the challenge and
killed him. The others woke up hearing the noise.
Hidimba introduced herself, and declared her love for
Bhima. She told Kunti: “] have forsaken my friends,
my dharma and my kin; and good lady, chosen your
tiger-like son for my man ... whether you think me a
fool, or your devoted servant, let me join you, great
lady, with your son as my husband.”

Ultimately, Yudhisthira agreed to the marriage on
condition that they would spend the day together but
that Bhima would return every night. The couple
roamed all over the world during the day. In due course "
Hidimba gave birth to a rakshasa boy named |
Ghatotkacha. Then the mother and son left the
Pandavas. Ghatotkacha promised to return to the ,_
Pandavas whenever they needed him.

> Identify the practices
described in this passage
which seem non-Brahmanical.

Some historians suggest that the term rakshasa is used
to describe people whose practices differed from those
laid down in Brahmanical texts.

3.5 Beyond the four varnas
Subordination and conflict

While the Brahmanas considered some people as
being outside the system, they also developed a
sharper social divide by classifying certain social
categories as “untouchable”. This rested on a notion
that certain activities, especially those connected
with the performance of rituals, were sacred and by

66

Fig. 3.6

Depiction of a mendicant seeking
alms, stone sculpture (Gandhara)
c. third century, CE

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

extension “pure”. Those who considered themselves
pure avoided taking food from those they designated
as “untouchable”. In sharp contrast to the purity
aspect, some activities were regarded as
particularly “polluting”. These included handling
corpses and dead animals. Those who performed
such tasks, designated as chandalas, were placed
at the very bottom of the hierarchy. Their touch
and, in some cases, even seeing them was regarded
as “polluting” by those who claimed to be at the top
of the social order.

The Manusmriti laid down the “duties” of the
chandalas. They had to live outside the village, use
discarded utensils, and wear clothes of the dead and
ornaments of iron. They could not walk about in
villages and cities at night.
They had to dispose of the
bodies of those who had no
relatives and serve as
executioners. Much later, the
Chinese Buddhist monk Fa
Xian (c. fifth century ce) wrote
that “untouchables” had to
sound a clapper in the streets
so that people could avoid seeing
them. Another Chinese pilgrim,
Xuan Zang (c. seventh century),
observed that executioners and
scavengers were forced to live
outside the city.

By examining non-Brahmanical
texts which depict the lives of
chandalas, historians have tried to
find out whether chandalas
accepted the life of degradation
prescribed in the Shastras.
Sometimes, these depictions
correspond with those in
the Brahmanical texts. But
occasionally, there are hints of
different social realities.

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS 67

Source 10

The Bodhisatta as a chandala

Did chandalas resist the attempts to push them to the
bottom of the social order? Read this story, which is part
of the Matanga Jataka, a Pali text, where the Bodhisatta
(the Buddha in a previous birth) is identified as a chandala.

Once, the Bodhisatta was born outside the city of
Banaras as a chandala’s son and named Matanga. One
day, when he had gone to the city on some work, he
encountered Dittha Mangalika, the daughter of a
merchant. When she saw him, she exclaimed “I have
seen something inauspicious” and washed her eyes.
The angry hangers-on then beat him up. In protest, he
went and lay down at the door of her father’s house.
On the seventh day they brought out the girl and gave
her to him. She carried the starving Matanga back to
the chandala settlement. Once he returned home, he
decided to renounce the world. After attaining spiritual
powers, he returned to Banaras and married her. A
son named Mandavya Kumara was born to them. He
learnt the three Vedas as he grew up and began to
provide food to 16,000 Brahmanas every day.

One day, Matanga, dressed in rags, with a clay alms
bowl in his hand, arrived at his son’s doorstep and
begged for food. Mandavya replied that he looked like
an outcaste and was unworthy of alms; the food was
meant for the Brahmanas. Matanga said: “Those who
are proud of their birth and are ignorant do not deserve
gifts. On the contrary, those who are free from vices
are worthy of offerings.” Mandavya lost his temper and
asked his servants to throw the man out. Matanga rose
in the air and disappeared. When Dittha Mangalika
learnt about the incident, she followed Matanga and
begged his forgiveness. He asked her to take a bit of
the leftover from his bowl and give it to Mandavya
and the Brahmanas ...

~ Discuss...

Which of the sources
mentioned in this section

| D Identify elements in the story that suggest that | suggest that people followed

| it was written from the perspective of Matanga. | the occupations laid down by
Brahmanas? Which sources
suggest other possibilities?

68

Source 11

Draupadi’s question

Draupadi is supposed to have
asked Yudhisthira whether he
had lost himself before staking
her. Two contrary opinions were
expressed in response to this
question.

One, that even if Yudhisthira
had lost himself earlier, his wife
remained under his control, so
he could stake her.

Two, that an unfree man (as
Yudhisthira was when he had
lost himself) could not stake
another person.

The matter remained unresolved;
ultimately, Dhritarashtra restored to
the Pandavas and Draupadi their
personal freedom.

eens |
| 2 Do you think that this

episode suggests that |
l wives could be treated as l

the property of their

husbands? |

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

4, BEYOND BIRTH

RESOURCES AND STATUS

If you recall the economic relations discussed
in Chapter 2, you will realise that slaves,
landless agricultural labourers, hunters, fisherfolk,
pastoralists, peasants, village headmen, craftspersons,
merchants and kings emerged as social actors in
different parts of the subcontinent. Their social
positions were often shaped by their access to
economic resources. Here we will examine the
social implications of access to resources in certain
specific situations.

4.1 Gendered access to property

Consider first a critical episode in the Mahabharata.
During the course of the long-drawn rivalry between
the Kauravas and the Pandavas, Duryodhana invited
Yudhisthira to a game of dice. The latter, who was
deceived by his rival, staked his gold, elephants,
chariots, slaves, army, treasury, kingdom, the
property of his subjects, his brothers and finally
himself and lost all. Then he staked their common
wife Draupadi and lost her too.

Issues of ownership, foregrounded in stories such
as this one (Source 11), also figure in the
Dharmasutras and Dharmashastras. According to
the Manusmriti, the paternal estate was to be divided
equally amongst sons after the death of the parents,
with a special share for the eldest. Women could not
claim a share of these resources.

However, women were allowed to retain the gifts
they received on the occasion of their marriage as
stridhana (literally, a woman’s wealth). This could
be inherited by their children, without the husband
having any claim on it. At the same time, the
Manusmriti warned women against hoarding family
property, or even their own valuables, without the
husband’s permission.

You have read about wealthy women such as the
Vakataka queen Prabhavati Gupta (Chapter 2).
However, cumulative evidence — both epigraphic and
textual - suggests that while upper-class women
may have had access to resources, land, cattle and
money were generally controlled by men. In other
words, social differences between men and women
were sharpened because of the differences in access
to resources.

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS

Source 12

How could men and women
acquire wealth?

For men, the Manusmriti declares, there are seven means
of acquiring wealth: inheritance, finding, purchase,
conquest, investment, work, and acceptance of gifts from
good people.

For women, there are six means of acquiring wealth:
what was given in front of the fire (marriage) or the bridal
procession, or as a token of affection, and what she got
from her brother, mother or father. She could also acquire
wealth through any subsequent gift and whatever her
“affectionate” husband might give her.

4.2 Varna and access to property

According to the Brahmanical texts, another
criterion (apart from gender) for regulating access
to wealth was varna. As we saw earlier, the only
“occupation” prescribed for Shudras was servitude,
while a variety of occupations were listed for men of
the first three varnas. If these provisions were
actually implemented, the wealthiest men would
have been the Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas. That
this corresponded to some extent with social realities
is evident from descriptions of priests and kings in
other textual traditions. Kings are almost invariably
depicted as wealthy; priests are also generally shown
to be rich, though there are occasional depictions of
the poor Brahmana.

At another level, even as the Brahmanical view of
society was codified in the Dharmasutras and
Dharmashastras, other traditions developed
critiques of the varna order. Some of the best-known
of these were developed within early Buddhism
(c. sixth century Bce onwards; see also Chapter 4).
The Buddhists recognised that there were differences
in society, but did not regard these as natural or
inflexible. They also rejected the idea of claims to
status on the basis of birth.

69

> Compare and contrast the |
ways in which men and |
women could acquire wealth. |

70

> Read Avantiputta’s first
statement again. What are the
ideas in it that are derived from
Brahmanical texts /traditions?
Can you identify the source of
any of these?

What, according to this text,
explains social difference?

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Source 13

The wealthy Shudra

This story, based on a Buddhist text in Pali known as the
Majjhima Nikaya, is part of a dialogue between a king
named Avantiputta and a disciple of the Buddha named
Kachchana. While it may not be literally true, it reveals
Buddhist attitudes towards varna.

Avantiputta asked Kachchana what he thought about
Brahmanas who held that they were the best caste
and that all other castes were low; that Brahmanas
were a fair caste while all other castes were dark; that
only Brahmanas were pure, not non-Brahmanas; that
Brahmanas were sons of Brahma, born of his mouth,
born of Brahma, formed by Brahma, heirs to Brahma.

Kachchana replied: “What if a Shudra were wealthy
. would another Shudra ...or a Kshatriya or a
Brahmana ora Vaishya ... speak politely to him?”

Avantiputta replied that if a Shudra had wealth or
+ corn or gold or silver, he could have as his obedient
servant another Shudra to get up earlier than he, to
go to rest later, to carry out his orders, to speak politely;
or he could even have a Kshatriya or a Brahmana ora
Vaishya as his obedient servant.

Kachchana asked: “This being so, are not these four
varmas exactly the same?”

Avantiputta conceded that there was no difference
_| amongst the varnas on this count.

4.3 An alternative social scenario:
Sharing wealth

So far we have been examining situations where
people either claimed or were assigned status on
the basis of their wealth. However, there were other
possibilities as well; situations where men who were
generous were respected, while those who were
miserly or simply accumulated wealth for themselves
were despised. One area where these values were
cherished was ancient Tamilakam, where, as we saw
earlier (Chapter 2), there were several chiefdoms
around 2,000 years ago. Amongst other things, the
chiefs were patrons of bards and poets who sang
their praise. Poems included in the Tamil Sangam
anthologies often illuminate social and economic

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS 71

relationships, suggesting that while there were
differences between rich and poor, those who
controlled resources were also expected to share
them.

Source 14

The poor generous chief

In this composition from the Puranaruru, one of the
anthologies of poems of the Tamil Sangam literature
(c first century cE), a bard describes his patron to other
poets thus :

He (i.e. the patron) doesn’t have the wealth to lavish
on others everyday

Fig. 3.7

A chief and his follower, stone
sculpture, Amaravati (Andhra
Pradesh), c. second century cE

Nor does he have the pettiness to say that he has
nothing and so refuse!

| D> How has the sculptor |
| shown the difference between |
| the chief and his follower? |
If you wish to cure your poverty, come LW
along with me, bards whose lips are so
skilled!

he lives in Irantai (a place) and is generous. He is an
enemy to the hunger of bards!

If we request him, showing him our ribs
thin with hunger, he will go to the
blacksmith of his village

And will say to that man of powerful
hands:

“Shape me a long spear for war, one that
has a straight blade!”
> What are the strategies which the
| bard uses to try and persuade the |
| chief to be generous? |
| What is the chief expected to do to |
| |
| |

acquire wealth in order to give some
to the bards?

~> Discuss...

How do social relationships operate
in present-day societies? Are there
any similarities or differences with
patterns of the past?

72

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

5. EXPLAINING SOCIAL DIFFERENCES:

A SOCIAL CONTRACT
The Buddhists also developed an alternative
understanding of social inequalities, and of the
institutions required to regulate social conflict. In a
myth found in a text known as the Sutta Pitaka they
suggested that originally human beings did not have
fully evolved bodily forms, nor was the world of plants
fully developed. All beings lived in an idyllic state of
peace, taking from nature only what they needed for
each meal.

However, there was a gradual deterioration of
this state as human beings became increasingly
greedy, vindictive and deceitful. This led them to
wonder: “What if we were to select a certain being
who should be wrathful when indignation is right,
who should censure that which should rightly be
censured and should banish him who deserves to
be banished? We will give him in return a proportion
of the rice ... chosen by the whole people, he will be
known as mahasammata, the great elect.”

This suggests that the institution of kingship
was based on human choice, with taxes as a form
of payment for services rendered by the king. At
the same time, it reveals recognition of human
agency in creating and institutionalising economic
and social relations. There are other implications
as well. For instance, if human beings were
responsible for the creation of the system, they could
also change it in future.

6. HANDLING TEXTS

HISTORIANS AND THE MAHABHARATA
If you look through the sources cited in this chapter
once more you will notice that historians consider
several elements when they analyse texts. They
examine whether texts were written in Prakrit, Pali
or Tamil, languages that were probably used by
ordinary people, or in Sanskrit, a language meant
almost exclusively for priests and elites. They also
consider the kinds of text. Were these mantras, learnt
and chanted by ritual specialists, or stories that
people could have read, or heard, and then retold if
they found them interesting? Besides, they try to
find out about the author(s) whose perspectives and
ideas shaped the text, as well as the intended

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS

audience, as, very often, authors keep the interests
of their audience in mind while composing their
work. And they try and ascertain the possible date
of the composition or compilation of the texts as well
as the place where they may have been composed. It
is only after making these assessments that they
draw on the content of texts to arrive at an
understanding of their historical significance. As you
can imagine, this is a particularly difficult task for
a text as complex as the Mahabharata.

6.1 Language and content

Let us look at the language of the text. The version
of the Mahabharata we have been considering is in
Sanskrit (although there are versions in other
languages as well). However, the Sanskrit used in
the Mahabharata is far simpler than that of the Vedas,
or of the prashastis discussed in Chapter 2. As such,
it was probably widely understood.

Historians usually classify the contents of the
present text under two broad heads - sections that
contain stories, designated as the narrative, and
sections that contain prescriptions about social
norms, designated as didactic. This division is by no
means watertight - the didactic sections include
stories, and the narrative often contains a social
message. However, generally historians agree that
the Mahabharata was meant to be a dramatic, moving
story, and that the didactic portions were probably
added later.

73

Didactic refers to something
that is meant for purposes of
instruction.

Fig. 3.8

Krishna advises Arjuna on the
battlefield

This painting dates to the
eighteenth century. Perhaps the
most important didactic section of
the Mahabharata is the Bhagavad
Gita, which contains the advice
offered by Lord Krishna to Arjuna.
This scene is frequently depicted
in painting and sculpture.

74

Fig. 3.9

Lord Ganesha the scribe
According to tradition, Vyasa
dictated the text to the deity.
This illustration is from a Persian
translation of the Mahabharata,
ec. 1740-50.

aa an

ke

St eT ae as ee a sicaen ate anes $$

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Interestingly, the text is described as an itihasa
within early Sanskrit tradition. The literal meaning
of the term is “thus it was”, which is why it is
generally translated as “history”. Was there a real
war that was remembered in the epic? We are not
sure. Some historians think that the memory of an
actual conflict amongst kinfolk was preserved in the
narrative; others point out that there is no other
corroborative evidence of the battle.

6.2 Author(s) and dates

Who wrote the text? This is a question to which
there are several answers. The original story was
probably composed by charioteer-bards known as
sutas who generally accompanied Kshatriya warriors
to the battlefield and composed poems celebrating
their victories and other achievements. These
compositions circulated orally. Then, from the fifth
century sce, Brahmanas took over the story and
began to commit it to writing. This was the time
when chiefdoms such as those of the Kurus and

'

Dp

ef) Ee |

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS

Panchalas, around whom the story of the epic
revolves, were gradually becoming kingdoms. Did the
new kings want their itihasa to be recorded and
preserved more systematically? It is also possible
that the upheavals that often accompanied the
establishment of these states, where old social values
were often replaced by new norms, are reflected in
some parts of the story.

We notice another phase in the composition of
the text between c. 200 sce and 200 ce. This was the
period when the worship of Vishnu was growing in
importance, and Krishna, one of the important
figures of the epic, was coming to be identified with
Vishnu. Subsequently, between c. 200 and 400 cz,
large didactic sections resembling the Manusmriti
were added. With these additions, a text which
initially perhaps had less than 10,000 verses grew
to comprise about 100,000 verses. This enormous
composition is traditionally attributed to a sage
named Vyasa.

6.3 The search for convergence

The Mahabharata, like any major epic, contains vivid
descriptions of battles, forests, palaces and
settlements. In 1951-52, the archaeologist B.B. Lal
excavated at a village named Hastinapura in Meerut
(Uttar Pradesh). Was this the Hastinapura of the
epic? While the similarity in names could be
coincidental, the location of the site in the Upper
Ganga doab, where the Kuru kingdom was situated,
suggests that it may have been the capital of the
Kurus mentioned in the text.

Lal found evidence of five occupational levels, of
which the second and third are of interest to us.
This is what Lal noted about the houses in the second
phase (c. twelfth-seventh centuries sce): “Within the
limited area excavated, no definite plans of houses
were obtained, but walls of mud and mud-bricks
were duly encountered. The discovery of mud-plaster
with prominent reed-marks suggested that some of
the houses had reed walls plastered over with mud.”
For the third phase (c. sixth-third centuries sce), he
noted: “Houses of this period were built of mud-brick
as well as burnt bricks. Soakage jars and brick
drains were used for draining out refuse water, while
terracotta ring-wells may have been used both as
wells and drainage pits.”

75

76

Source 15

Hastinapura

This is how the city is described
in the Adi Parvan of the
Mahabharata:

The city, bursting like the
ocean, packed with hundreds
of mansions, displayed with
its gateways, arches and
turrets like massing clouds
the splendour of Great
Indra’s city.

| > Do you think Lal's finds |

| match the description of |

| Hastinapura in the epic? |

Fig. 3.10
A wall excavated at Hastinapura

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Was the description of the city in the epic added
after the main narrative had been composed, when
(after the sixth century sce) urban centres flourished
in the region? Or was it a flight of poetic fancy, which
cannot always be verified by comparisons with other
kinds of evidence?

Consider another instance. One of the most
challenging episodes in the Mahabharata is
Draupadi’s marriage with the Pandavas, an instance
of polyandry that is central to the narrative. If we
examine the section of the epic that describes this
event, it is evident that the author(s) attempted to
explain it in a variety of ways.

Source 16

Draupadi’s marriage

Drupada, the king of Panchala, organised a competition
where the challenge was to string a bow and hit a target;
the winner would be chosen to marry his daughter
Draupadi. Arjuna was victorious and was garlanded by
Draupadi. The Pandavas returned with her to their mother
Kunti, who, even before she saw them, asked them to
share whatever they had got. She realised her mistake
when she saw Draupadi, but her command could not be
violated. After much deliberation, Yudhisthira decided that
Draupadi would be their common wife.

When Drupada was told about this, he protested.
However, the seer Vyasa arrived and told him that the
Pandavas were in reality incarnations of Indra, whose wife
had been reborn as Draupadi, and they were thus destined
for each other.

Vyasa added that in another instance a young woman
had prayed to Shiva for a husband, and in her enthusiasm,
had prayed five times instead of once. This woman was
now reborn as Draupadi, and Shiva had fulfilled her
prayers. Convinced by these stories, Drupada consented
to the marriage.

-
|

> Why do you think the author(s) offered three
| explanations for a single episode?

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS

Present-day historians suggest that the fact that
the author(s) describe a polyandrous union indicates
that polyandry may have been prevalent amongst
ruling elites at some point of time. At the same time,
the fact that so many different explanations are
offered for the episode (Source 16) suggests that
polyandry gradually fell into disfavour amongst the
Brahmanas, who reworked and developed the text
through the centuries.

Some historians note that while the practice of
polyandry may have seemed unusual or even
undesirable from the Brahmanical point of view, it
was (and is) prevalent in the Himalayan region.
Others suggest that there may have been a shortage
of women during times of warfare, and this led to
polyandry. In other words, it was attributed to a
situation of crisis.

Some early sources suggest that polyandry was
not the only or even the most prevalent form of
marriage. Why then did the author(s) choose to
associate this practice with the central characters
of the Mahabharata? We need to remember that
creative literature often has its own narrative
requirements and does not always literally reflect
social realities.

7. A DYNAMIC TEXT

The growth of the Mahabharata did not stop with
the Sanskrit version. Over the centuries, versions
of the epic were written in a variety of languages
through an ongoing process of dialogue between
peoples, communities, and those who wrote the
texts. Several stories that originated in specific
regions or circulated amongst certain people found
their way into the epic. At the same time, the central
story of the epic was often retold in different ways.
And episodes were depicted in sculpture and
painting. They also provided themes for a wide range
of performing arts - plays, dance and other kinds
of narrations.

77

~> Discuss...

Read the excerpts from the
Mahabharata included in this
chapter once more. For each
of these, discuss whether they
could have been literally true.
What do these excerpts tell us
about those who composed
the text? What do they tell us
about those who must have
read or heard the epic?

78

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Most retellings or re-enactments of the epic draw on
the main narrative in creative ways. Let us look at one
example, an episode from the Mahabharata that has
been transformed by Mahashweta Devi, a contemporary
Bengali writer known for raising her voice against all
forms of exploitation and oppression. In this particular
instance, she works out alternative possibilities from
the main story of the Mahabharata and draws attention
to questions on which the Sanskrit text is silent.

The Sanskrit text describes how Duryodhana plotted
to kill the Pandavas by inviting them to stay in a
specially prepared house of lac, which he planned to
set on fire. Forewarned, the Pandavas dug a tunnel to
ensure their escape. Then Kunti arranged for a feast.
While most of the invitees were Brahmanas, a nishada
woman came with her five sons. When they were
satiated with drink and fell off to sleep, the Pandavas
escaped, setting fire to the house. When the bodies of
the woman and her sons were discovered, people
thought that the Pandavas were dead.

In her short story titled “Kunti O Nishadi”,
Mahashweta Devi takes up the narrative from where
the Mahabharata ends it. She sets the story in a forest,
where Kunti retires after the war. Kunti now has time
to reflect on her past, and often confesses to what she
regards as her failings, talking with the earth, the
symbol of nature. Every day she sees the nishadas who
come to collect wood, honey, tubers and roots. One
nishadi (a nishada woman) often listens to Kunti when
she talks with the earth.

One day, there was something in the air; the animals
were fleeing the forest. Kunti noticed that the nishadi
was watching her, and was startled when she spoke to
her and asked if she remembered the house of lac. Yes,
Kunti said, she did. Did she remember a certain elderly
nishadi and her five young sons? And that she had
served them wine till they were senseless, while she
escaped with her own sons? That nishadi ... “Not you!”
Kunti exclaimed. The nishadi replied that the woman
who was killed had been her mother-in-law. She added
that while Kunti had been reflecting on her past, not
once did she remember the six innocent lives that were
lost because she had wanted to save herself and her
sons. As they spoke, the flames drew nearer. The nishadi
escaped to safety, but Kunti remained where she was.

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS 79

G~
TIMELINE 1 >

MAJOR TEXTUAL TRADITIONS

c. 500 BcE Ashtadhyayi of Panini, a work on Sanskrit grammar
c. 500-200 BcEe Major Dharmasutras (in Sanskrit)

c. 500-100 BcE Early Buddhist texts including the Tripitaka (in Pali)

c. 500 Bce-400 cE Ramayana and Mahabharata (in Sanskrit)

c. 200 Bce-200 cE Manusmriti (in Sanskrit); composition and compilation

of Tamil Sangam literature

c. 100 cE Charaka and Sushruta Samhitas, works on medicine
(in Sanskrit)

c. 200 ce onwards Compilation of the Puranas (in Sanskrit)

c. 300 cE Natyashastra of Bharata, a work on dramaturgy
(in Sanskrit)

c. 300-600 cE Other Dharmashastras (in Sanskrit)

c. 400-500 cE Sanskrit plays including the works of Kalidasa;

works on astronomy and mathematics by Aryabhata and
Varahamihira (in Sanskrit); compilation of Jaina works
(in Prakrit)

\. y,

G
TIMELINE 2 )

MAJOR LANDMARKS IN THE STUDY OF THE MAHABHARATA

Twentieth century

1919-66 Preparation and publication of the Critical Edition of the
Mahabharata
1973 J.A.B. van Buitenen begins English translation of the Critical

Edition; remains incomplete after his death in 1978

80

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

ANSWER IN 100-150 WORDS

1.

Explain why patriliny may have been particularly
important among elite families.

Discuss whether kings in early states were
invariably Kshatriyas.

Compare and contrast the dharma or norms
mentioned in the stories of Drona, Hidimba and
Matanga.

In what ways was the Buddhist theory of a social
contract different from the Brahmanical view of
society derived from the Purusha sukta?

The following is an excerpt from the
Mahabharata, in which Yudhisthira, the eldest
Pandava, speaks to Sanjaya, a messenger:

Sanjaya, convey my respectful greetings to all
the Brahmanas and the chief priest of the
house of Dhritarashtra. I bow respectfully to
teacher Drona ... I hold the feet of our
preceptor Kripa... (and) the chiefof the Kurus,
the great Bhishma. I bow respectfully to the
old king (Dhritarashtra). I greet and ask after
the health of his son Duryodhana and his
younger brother ... Also greet all the young
Kuru warriors who are our brothers, sons and
grandsons... Greet above all him, who is to
us like father and mother, the wise Vidura
(born of a slave woman) ... I bow to the elderly
ladies who are known as our mothers. To
those who are our wives you say this, “I hope
they are well-protected”... Our daughters-in-
law born of good families and mothers of
children greet on my behalf. Embrace for me
those who are our daughters... The beautiful,
fragrant, well-dressed courtesans of ours you
should also greet. Greet the slave women and
their children, greet the aged, the maimed
(and) the helpless ...

Try and identify the criteria used to make this
list —- in terms of age, gender, kinship ties. Are there
any other criteria? For each category, explain why
they are placed in a particular position in the list.

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS 81

WRITE A SHORT ESSAY (ABOUT
500 WORDS) ON THE FOLLOWING:

This is what a famous historian of Indian
literature, Maurice Winternitz, wrote about the
Mahabharata: “just because the Mahabharata
represents more of an entire literature .... and
contains so much and so many kinds of things, ...
(it) gives(s) us an insight into the most profound
depths of the soul of the Indian folk.” Discuss.

Discuss whether the Mahabharata could have
been the work of a single author.

How important were gender differences in early
societies? Give reasons for your answer.

Discuss the evidence that suggests that
Brahmanical prescriptions about kinship and
marriage were not universally followed.

r | MAP WORK

10.

Compare the map in this chapter with Map 1 in
Chapter 2. List the mahajanapadas and cities
located near the Kuru-Panchala lands.

oa

PROJECT (ANY ONE)

Lis

If you would like to know
more, read:

Uma Chakravarti. 2006.
Everyday Lives, Everyday
Histaries. Tulika, New Delhi.

lIrawati Karve. 1968.
Kinship Organisation in India.
Asia Publishing House, Bombay.

R.S. Sharma. 1983.

Eoonamic History of Early India.
Munshiram Manoharlal,

New Delhi.

11. Find out about retellings of the Mahabharata in VS. Sukthankar. 1957.
other languages. Discuss how they handle any On the Meaning of the
two of the episodes of the text described in this Mahabharata. Asiatic Society of
chapter, explaining any similarities or differences Bombay, Bombay.
that you notice.
. . Romila Thapar. 2000.
12. Imagine that you are an author and rewrite the

story of Ekalavya from a perspective of your
choice.

Cultural Pasts: Essays in Farly
Indian Histor y. Oxford University
Press, New Delhi.

For more information,
you could visit:
http://bombay.indology.info/
mahabharata/statement.html

vee THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

Fig. 4.1
A sculpture from Sanchi

Fig. 4.2
Shahjehan Begum

CULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS
(C. BOO BcE-6OO cE)

In this chapter we shall go on a long journey across a
thousand years to read about philosophers and their
attempts to understand the world they inhabited. We will
also see how their ideas were compiled as oral and written
texts as well as expressed in architecture and sculpture.
These are indicative of the enduring influence these
thinkers had on people. While we will be focusing on
Buddhism, it is important to remember that this tradition
did not develop in isolation - there were several other
traditions, each engaged in debates and dialogues with
the others.

The sources that historians use to reconstruct this
exciting world of ideas and beliefs include Buddhist, Jaina
and Brahmanical texts, as well as a large and impressive
body of material remains including monuments and
inscriptions. Among the best preserved monuments of
the time is the stupa at Sanchi which is a major focus in
this chapter.

1. A GLIMPSE OF SANCHI

Sanchi in the nineteenth century

The most wonderful ancient buildings in the state of Bhopal
are at Sanchi Kanakhera, a small village under the brow
of a hill some 20 miles north-east of Bhopal which we
visited yesterday. We inspected the stone sculptures and
statues of the Buddha and an ancient gateway ... The ruins
appear to be the object of great interest to European
gentlemen. Major Alexander Cunningham ... stayed several
weeks in this neighbourhood and examined these ruins
most carefully. He took drawings of the place, deciphered
the inscription, and bored shafts down these domes. The
results of his investigations were described by him in an
English work ...

FRoM SHAHJEHAN BEGUM, NAwaAB OF BHopaL (ruled 1868-1901),

Ta} ul Ickal Tarikh Bhopal (A Histor y of Bhopal) , translated by
H.D. Barstow, 1876.

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

Nineteenth-century Europeans were very interested
in the stupa at Sanchi. In fact, the French sought
Shahjehan Begum’s permission to take away the
eastern gateway, which was the best preserved, to
be displayed in a museum in France. For a while
some Englishmen also wanted to do the same, but
fortunately both the French and the English were
satisfied with carefully prepared plaster-cast copies
and the original remained at the site, part of the
Bhopal state.

The rulers of Bhopal, Shahjehan Begum and her
successor Sultan Jehan Begum, provided money for
the preservation of the ancient site. No wonder then
that John Marshall dedicated his important volumes
on Sanchi to Sultan Jehan. She funded the museum
that was built there as well as the guesthouse where
he lived and wrote the volumes. She also funded
the publication of the volumes. So if the stupa
complex has survived, it is in no small measure
due to wise decisions, and to good luck in escaping
the eyes of railway contractors, builders, and those
looking for finds to carry away to the museums of
Europe. One of the most important Buddhist
centres, the discovery of Sanchi has vastly
transformed our understanding of early Buddhism.
Today it stands testimony to the successful
restoration and preservation of a key archaeological
site by the Archaeological Survey of India.

83

Fig. 4.3

The Great Stupa at Sanchi

If you travel from Delhi to Bhopal
by train, you will see the majestic
stupa complex on top of a hill,
crowning it as it were. If you
request the guard he will stop the
train at the little station of Sanchi
for two minutes — enough time for
you to get down. As you climb up
the hill you can see the complex of
structures: a large mound and
other monuments including a
temple built in the fifth century.

84

~ Discuss...

Compare what Shahjehan
Begum described with what
you see in Fig. 3. What

similarities and differences do

you notice?

Source 1

A prayer to Agni

Here are two verses from the
Rigveda invoking Agni, the god
of fire, often identified with the
sacrificial fire, into which
offerings were made so as to
reach the other deities:

Bring, O strong one, this
sacrifice of ours to the gods,
O wise one, asa liberal giver.
Bestow on us, O priest,
abundant food. Agni, obtain,
by sacrificing, mighty wealth
for us.

Procure, O Agni, for ever
to him who prays to you (the
gift of) nourishment, the
wonderful cow. May a son be
ours, offspring that continues
our line ...

Verses such as these were

composed in a special kind of

Sanskrit, known as Vedic
Sanskrit. They were taught
orally to men belonging to
priestly families.

-
l > List the objectives of l
the sacrifice.

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

But what is the significance of this monument?
Why was the mound built and what did it contain?
Why is there a stone railing around it? Who built
the complex or paid for its construction? When was
it “discovered”? There is a fascinating story that we
can uncover at Sanchi for which we must combine
information from texts, sculpture, architecture and
inscriptions. Let us begin by exploring the
background of the early Buddhist tradition.

2. THE BACKGROUND:

SACRIFICES AND DEBATES

The mid-first millennium sce is often regarded as a
turning point in world history: it saw the emergence
of thinkers such as Zarathustra in Iran, Kong Zi in
China, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle in Greece, and
Mahavira and Gautama Buddha, among many
others, in India. They tried to understand the
mysteries of existence and the relationship between
human beings and the cosmic order. This was also
the time when new kingdoms and cities were
developing and social and economic life was changing
in a variety of ways in the Ganga valley (Chapters 2
and 3). These thinkers attempted to understand
these developments as well.

2.1 The sacrificial tradition

There were several pre-existing traditions of thought,
religious belief and practice, including the early Vedic
tradition, known from the Rigveda, compiled between
c.1500 and 1000 sce. The Rigveda consists of hymns
in praise of a variety of deities, especially Agni, Indra
and Soma. Many of these hymns were chanted when
sacrifices were performed, where people prayed for
cattle, sons, good health, long life, etc.

At first, sacrifices were performed collectively.
Later (c. 1000 Bce-500 BcE onwards) some were
performed by the heads of households for the well-
being of the domestic unit. More elaborate sacrifices,
such as the rajasuya and ashvamedha, were
performed by chiefs and kings who depended on
Brahmana priests to conduct the ritual.

2.2 New questions

Many ideas found in the Upanishads (c. sixth century
BCE onwards) show that people were curious about
the meaning of life, the possibility of life after death,

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS 85

and rebirth. Was rebirth due to past actions? Such
issues were hotly debated. Thinkers were concerned
with understanding and expressing the nature of
the ultimate reality. And others, outside the Vedic
tradition, asked whether or not there even was a
single ultimate reality. People also began speculating
on the significance of the sacrificial tradition.

2.3 Debates and discussions

We get a glimpse of lively discussions and debates
from Buddhist texts, which mention as many as 64
sects or schools of thought. Teachers travelled from
place to place, trying to convince one another as
well as laypersons, about the validity of their
philosophy or the way they understood the world.
Debates took place in the kutagarashala - literally,
a hut with a pointed roof - or in groves where
travelling mendicants halted. If a philosopher
succeeded in convincing one of his rivals, the
followers of the latter also became his disciples. So
support for any particular sect could grow and shrink
over time.

Many of these teachers, including Mahavira and
the Buddha, questioned the authority of the Vedas.
They also emphasised individual agency — suggesting
that men and women could strive to attain liberation
from the trials and tribulations of worldly existence.
This was in marked contrast to the Brahmanical
position, wherein, as we have seen, an individual’s
existence was thought to be determined by his or
her birth in a specific caste or gender.

Source 2

Verses from the Upanishads

Here are two verses from the Chhandegya Upanishad, a text composed
in Sanskrit ¢ sixth century BCE:

The nature of the self
This self of mine within the heart, is smaller than paddy or barley or
mustard or millet or the kernel of a seed of millet. This self of mine
within the heart is greater than the earth, greater than the intermediate
space, greater than heaven, greater than these worlds.

The true sacrifice
This one (the wind) that blows, this is surely a sacrifice ...
While moving, it sanctifies all this; therefore it is indeed a sacrifice.

86

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

How Buddhist texts were
prepared and preserved

The Buddha (and other teachers) taught orally — through discussion and
debate. Men and women (perhaps children as well) attended these discourses
and discussed what they heard. None of the Buddha’s speeches were written
down during his lifetime. After his death (c fifth-fourth century sce) his
teachings were compiled by his disciples at a council of “elders” or senior
monks at Vesali (Pali for Vaishali in present-day Bihar). These compilations
were known as Tipitaka — literally, three baskets to hold different types of
texts. They were first transmitted orally and then written and classified
according to length as well as subject matter.

The Vinaya Pitaka included rules and regulations for those who joined the
sangha or monastic order; the Buddha’s teachings were included in the Sutta
Pitaka; and the Abhidhamma Pitaka dealt with philosophical matters. Each
pitaka comprised a number of individual texts. Later, commentaries were
written on these texts by Buddhist scholars.

As Buddhism travelled to new regions such as Sri Lanka, other texts such
as the Dipavamsa (literally, the chronicle of the island) and Mahavamsa (the
great chronicle) were written, containing regional histories of Buddhism.
Many of these works contained biographies of the Buddha. Some of the
oldest texts are in Pali, while later compositions are in Sanskrit.

When Buddhism spread to East Asia, pilgrims such as Fa Xian and Xuan
Zang travelled all the way from China to India in search of texts. These they
took back to their own country, where they were translated by scholars.
Indian Buddhist teachers also travelled to faraway places, carrying texts to
disseminate the teachings of the Buddha.

Buddhist texts were preserved in manuscripts for several centuries in
monasteries in different parts of Asia. Modern translations have been prepared
from Pali, Sanskrit, Chinese and Tibetan texts.

Fig. 4.4
A Buddhist manuscript in Sanskrit, c. twelfth century

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

Source 3

Fatalists and materialists?

Here is an excerpt from the Sutta Pitaka, describing a
conversation between king Ajatasattu, the ruler of
Magadha, and the Buddha:

On one occasion King Ajatasattu visited the Buddha
and described what another teacher, named Makkhali
Gosala, had told him:

“Though the wise should hope, by this virtue ... by
this penance | will gain karma ... and the fool should
by the same means hope to gradually rid himself of his
karma, neither of them can do it. Pleasure and pain,
measured out as it were, cannot be altered in the
course of samsara (transmigration). It can neither be
lessened or increased ... just as a ball of string will when
thrown unwind to its full length, so fool and wise alike
will take their course and make an end of sorrow.”

And this is what a philosopher named Ajita
Kesakambalin taught:

“There is no such thing, O king, as alms or sacrifice,
or offerings ... there is no such thing as this world or
the next ...

A human being is made up of the four elements.
When he dies the earthy in him returns to the earth,
the fluid to water, the heat to fire, the windy to air,
and his senses pass into space ...

The talk of gifts is a doctrine of fools, an empty lie ...
fools and wise alike are cut off and perish. They do
not survive after death.”

The first teacher belonged to the tradition of the Ajivikas.
They have often been described as fatalists: those who
believe that everything is predetermined. The second
teacher belonged to the tradition of the Lokayatas, usually
described as materialists. Texts from these traditions have
not survived, so we know about them only from the works
of other traditions.

> Do you think it is appropriate to describe
these men as fatalists or materialists?

87

> Discuss...

What are the problems in
reconstructing histories of
ideas and beliefs when texts
are not available or have not
survived?

88 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

3.BEYOND WORLDLY PLEASURES

THE MESSAGE OF MAHAVIRA
The basic philosophy of the Jainas was already in
existence in north India before the birth of
Vardhamana, who came to be known as Mahavira,
in the sixth century sce. According to Jaina tradition,
Mahavira was preceded by 23 other teachers or
tirthankaras — literally, those who guide men and
women across the river of existence.

The most important idea in Jainism is that the
entire world is animated: even stones, rocks and
water have life. Non-injury to living beings, especially
to humans, animals, plants and insects, is central
to Jaina philosophy. In fact the principle of ahimsa,
emphasised within Jainism, has left its mark on
Indian thinking as a whole. According to Jaina
teachings, the cycle of birth and rebirth is shaped
through karma. Asceticism and penance are required
to free oneself from the cycle of karma. This can be
achieved only by renouncing the world; therefore,

Fig. 4.5 monastic existence is a necessary condition of
An image of a tirthankara from salvation. Jaina monks and nuns took five vows: to
Mathura, c. third century ce abstain from killing, stealing and lying; to observe

celibacy; and to abstain from possessing property.
Source 4

The world beyond the palace

Just as the Buddha’s teachings were compiled by his followers, the teachings of
Mahavira were also recorded by his disciples. These were often in the form of stories,
which could appeal to ordinary people. Here is one example, from a Prakrit text
known as the Uttaradhyayana Sutta, describing how a queen named Kamalavati
tried to persuade her husband to renounce the world:

If the whole world and all its treasures were yours, you would not be satisfied,
nor would all this be able to save you. When you die, O king and leave all things
behind, dhamma alone, and nothing else, will save you. As a bird dislikes the
cage, so do I dislike (the world). I shall live as a nun without offspring, without
desire, without the love of gain, and without hatred ...

Those who have enjoyed pleasures and renounced them, move about like the
wind, and go wherever they please, unchecked like birds in their flight ...

Leave your large kingdom ... abandon what pleases the senses, be without
attachment and property, then practise severe penance, being firm of energy ...

> Which of the arguments advanced by the queen
do you find most convincing?

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

3.1 The spread of Jainism

Gradually, Jainism spread to many parts of India. Like
the Buddhists, Jaina scholars produced a wealth of
literature in a variety of languages — Prakrit, Sanskrit
and Tamil. For centuries, manuscripts of these texts
were carefully preserved in libraries attached to
temples.

Some of the earliest stone sculptures associated
with religious traditions were produced by devotees
of the Jaina tirthankaras, and have been recovered
from several sites throughout the subcontinent.

4.THE BUDDHA AND THE QUEST

FOR ENLIGHTENMENT
One of the most influential teachers of the time was
the Buddha. Over the centuries, his message spread
across the subcontinent and beyond - through
Central Asia to China, Korea and Japan, and through
Sri Lanka, across the seas to Myanmar, Thailand
and Indonesia.

How do we know about the Buddha’s teachings?
These have been reconstructed by carefully editing,
translating and analysing the Buddhist texts
mentioned earlier. Historians have also tried to
reconstruct details of his life from hagiographies.
Many of these were written down at least a century
after the time of the Buddha, in an attempt to
preserve memories of the great teacher.

According to these traditions, Siddhartha, as the
Buddha was named at birth, was the son of a chief

89

> Discuss...
Is ahimsa relevant in the
twenty-first century?

Fig. 4.6

A page from a fourteenth-century
Jaina manuscript
ee

Hagiography is a biography of
a saint or religious leader.
Hagiographies often praise the
saint’s achievements, and may
not always be literally accurate.
They are important because
they tell us about the beliefs of
the followers of that particular
tradition.

4

90

Fig. 4.7

A sculpture (c. 200 cE) from
Amaravati (Andhra Pradesh),
depicting the departure of the
Buddha from his palace

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

of the Sakya clan. He had a sheltered upbringing
within the palace, insulated from the harsh realities
of life. One day he persuaded his charioteer to take
him into the city. His first journey into the world
outside was traumatic. He was deeply anguished
when he saw an old man, a sick man and a corpse.
He realised in that moment that the decay and
destruction of the human body was inevitable. He
also saw a homeless mendicant, who, it seemed to
him, had come to terms with old age, disease and
death, and found peace. Siddhartha decided that he
too would adopt the same path. Soon after, he left
the palace and set out in search of his own truth.
Siddhartha explored several paths including bodily
mortification which led him to a situation of near
death. Abandoning these extreme methods, he
meditated for several days and finally attained
enlightenment. After this he came to be known as
the Buddha or the Enlightened One. For the rest of
his life, he taught
dhamma or the path
of righteous living.

~ Discuss...

If you did not know
about the life of the
Buddha, would you
be able to tell what
the sculpture
depicts?

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

5. THE TEACHINGS OF THE BUDDHA

The Buddha’s teachings have been reconstructed
from stories, found mainly in the Sutta Pitaka.
Although some stories describe his miraculous
powers, others suggest that the Buddha tried to
convince people through reason and persuasion
rather than through displays of supernatural power.
For instance, when a grief-stricken woman whose
child had died came to the Buddha, he gently
convinced her about the inevitability of death rather
than bring her son back to life. These stories were
narrated in the language spoken by ordinary people
so that these could be easily understood.
According to Buddhist philosophy, the world is
transient (anicca) and constantly changing; it is
also soulless (anatta) as there is nothing
permanent or eternal in it. Within this transient
world, sorrow (dukkha) is intrinsic to human
existence. It is by following the path of moderation
between severe penance and self-indulgence
that human beings can rise above these worldly
troubles. In the earliest forms of Buddhism,
whether or not god existed was irrelevant.

Source 5

Buddhism in practice

This is an excerpt from the Sutta Pitaka, and contains the
advice given by the Buddha to a wealthy householder
named Sigala:

In five ways should a master look after his servants
and employees ... by assigning them work according
to their strength, by supplying them with food and
wages, by tending them in sickness; by sharing
delicacies with them and by granting leave at times ...

In five ways should the clansmen look after the needs
of samanas (those who have renounced the world)
and Brahmanas: by affection in act and speech and
mind, by keeping open house to them and supplying
their worldly needs.

There are similar instructions to Sigala about how to
behave with his parents, teacher and wife.

r
| > Suggest what the instructions regarding
parents, teacher and wife may have been.

91

92

~> Discuss...

Compare the Buddha’s advice
to Sigala with Asoka’s advice
to his subjects (Chapter 2).
Do you notice any similarities
and differences?

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

The Buddha regarded the social world as the
creation of humans rather than of divine origin.
Therefore, he advised kings and gahapatis (see also
Chapter 2) to be humane and ethical. Individual effort
was expected to transform social relations.

The Buddha emphasised individual agency and
righteous action as the means to escape from the
cycle of rebirth and attain self-realisation and
nibbana, literally the extinguishing of the ego and
desire - and thus end the cycle of suffering for those
who renounced the world. According to Buddhist
tradition, his last words to his followers were: “Be
lamps unto yourselves as all of you must work out
your own liberation.”

6. FOLLOWERS OF THE BUDDHA

Soon there grew a body of disciples of the Buddha
and he founded a sangha, an organisation of monks
who too became teachers of dhamma. These monks
lived simply, possessing only the essential requisites
for survival, such as a bowl to receive food once a
day from the laity. As they lived on alms, they were
known as bhiklchus.

Initially, only men were allowed into the sangha,
but later women also came to be admitted. According
to Buddhist texts, this was made possible through
the mediation of Ananda, one of the Buddha’s dearest
disciples, who persuaded him to allow women
into the sangha. The Buddha's foster mother,
Mahapajapati Gotami was the first woman to be
ordained as a bhikkhuni. Many women who entered
the sangha became teachers of dhamma and went
on to become theris, or respected women who had
attained liberation.

The Buddha’s followers came from many social
groups. They included kings, wealthy men and
gahapatis, and also humbler folk: workers, slaves
and craftspeople. Once within the sangha, all were
regarded as equal, having shed their earlier social
identities on becoming bhikkhus and bhiklkchunis. The
internal functioning of the sangha was based on the
traditions of ganas and sanghas, where consensus
was arrived at through discussions. If that failed,
decisions were taken by a vote on the subject.

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS 93

Source 6

The Therigatha

Fig. 4.8
This unique Buddhist text, part of the Sutta Pitaka, is a A woman water-carrier, Mathura,
collection of verses composed by bhikkhunis. It provides c. third century cE

an insight into women’s social and spiritual experiences.
Punna, a casi or slave woman, went to the river each
morning to fetch water for her master’s household. There
she would daily see a Brahmana performing bathing rituals.
One morning she spoke to him. The following are verses
composed by Punna, recording her conversation with the
Brahmana:

Iam a water carrier:

Even in the cold

I have always gone down to the water

frightened of punishment

Or the angry words of high class women.

So what are you afraid of Brahmana,

That makes you go down to the water

(Though) your limbs shake with the bitter cold?

The Brahmana replied:

Iam doing good to prevent evil;
anyone young or old

who has done something bad

is freed by washing in water.

Punna said:

Whoever told you

You are freed from evil by washing in the water’?...
In that case all the frogs and turtles

Would go to heaven, and so would the water snakes
and crocodiles!

(nstead) Don’t do that thing,
the fear of which

leads you to the water.

Stop now Brahmana!

Save your skin from the cold ...

> Which of the teachings of the Buddha are
evident in this composition?

94 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Source 7

Rules for monks and nuns

These are some of the rules laid down in the vinaya
Pitaka:

When a new felt (blanket/rug) has been made by a
bhikkhu, it is to be kept for (at least) six years. If after
less than six years he should have another new felt
(blanket/rug) made, regardless of whether or not he
has disposed of the first, then — unless he has been
authorised by the bhikkhus — it is to be forfeited and
confessed.

In case a bhikkhu arriving at a family residence is
presented with cakes or cooked grain-meal, he may

accept two or three bowlfuls if he so desires. If he
should accept more than that, it is to be confessed.
Having accepted the two or three bowlfuls and having
taken them from there, he is to share them among the
bhikkhus. This is the proper course here.

Should any bhikkhu, having set out bedding in a
lodging belonging to the sangha — or having had it set
out — and then on departing neither put it away nor
have it put away, or should he go without taking leave,
it is to be confessed.

Buddhism grew rapidly both during the lifetime
of the Buddha and after his death, as it appealed to
many people dissatisfied with existing religious
practices and confused by the rapid social changes
taking place around them. The importance attached
to conduct and values rather than claims of
superiority based on birth, the emphasis placed on
metta (fellow feeling) and karuna (compassion),
especially for those who were younger and weaker
than oneself, were ideas that drew men and women
to Buddhist teachings.

> Discuss...

Why do you think a dasi like Punna wanted to join
the sangha?

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

7. STUPAS

We have seen that Buddhist ideas and practices
emerged out of a process of dialogue with other
traditions — including those of the Brahmanas, Jainas
and several others, not all of whose ideas and
practices were preserved in texts. Some of these
interactions can be seen in the ways in which sacred
places came to be identified.

From earliest times, people tended to regard
certain places as sacred. These included sites
with special trees or unique rocks, or sites of awe-
inspiring natural beauty. These sites, with small
shrines attached to them, were sometimes
described as chaityas.

Buddhist literature mentions several chaityas.
It also describes places associated with the

Map 1
Major Buddhist sites
\
-.
Xe)
S %
o oO y
© ie aA Lumbini
Say ‘Shravasti ®
P, ve F
Bo \_@ Kusinagara
‘, Ea eae = SS
~~ Sarnath » © _Barabar
C / ™ Bodh
® Bharhut Gaya
Narmada._~ ® Sanchi
ahanad!
eee
Nasik, Ajanta =k
= 2 Junnar ; Se
Karle ia
ARABIAN -. Nagarjunakonda
SEA Srishna ®Amaravati
BAY OF
BENGAL
Krishna
Sketch map not to scale

95

Chaitya may also have been
derived from the word chita,
meaning a funeral pyre, and by
extension a funerary mound.

96

Source 8

Why were stupas built

T

Mahaparinibbana Sutta, part of

his is an excerpt from the

the Sutta Pitaka:

r

As the Buddha lay dying,
Ananda asked him:

“What are we to do Lord,
with the remains of the
Tathagata (another name for
the Buddha)?”

The Buddha replied:
“Hinder not yourselves
Ananda by honouring the
remains of the Tathagata. Be
zealous, be intent on your
own good.”

But when pressed further,
the Buddha said:

“At the four crossroads
they should erect a thupa
(Pali for stupa) to the
Tathagata. And whosoever
shall there place garlands or
perfume or make a
salutation there, or become
in its presence calm of heart,
that shall long be to them for
a profit and joy.”

=~ 7
> Look at Fig. 4.15 and see
whether you can identify
some of these practices. |

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Buddha’s life - where he was born (Lumbini), where
he attained enlightenment (Bodh Gaya), where he
gave his first sermon (Sarnath) and where he
attained nibbana (Kusinagara). Gradually, each of
these places came to be regarded as sacred. We
know that about 200 years after the time of the
Buddha, Asoka erected a pillar at Lumbini to mark
the fact that he had visited the place.

7.1 Why were stupas built
There were other places too that were regarded as
sacred. This was because relics of the Buddha such
as his bodily remains or objects used by him were
buried there. These were mounds known as stupas.
The tradition of erecting stupas may have been
pre-Buddhist, but they came to be associated with
Buddhism. Since they contained relics regarded as
sacred, the entire stupa came to be venerated as an
emblem of both the Buddha and Buddhism.
According to a Buddhist text known as the
Ashokavadana, Asoka distributed portions of the
Buddha’s relics to every important town and ordered
the construction of stupas over them. By the second
century Bc—E a number of stupas, including those at
Bharhut, Sanchi and Sarnath (Map 1), had been
built.

7.2 How were stupas built

Inscriptions found on the railings and pillars of
stupas record donations made for building and
decorating them. Some donations were made by kings
such as the Satavahanas; others were made by
guilds, such as that of the ivory workers who
financed part of one of the gateways at Sanchi.
Hundreds of donations were made by women and
men who mention their names, sometimes adding
the name of the place from where they came, as
well as their occupations and names of their
relatives. Bhikkhus and bhikkhunis also contributed
towards building these monuments.

7.3 The structure of the stupa

The stupa (a Sanskrit word meaning a heap)
originated as a simple semi-circular mound of earth,
later called anda. Gradually, it evolved into a more
complex structure, balancing round and square
shapes. Above the anda was the harmika, a balcony-
like structure that represented the abode of the gods.

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

Arising from the harmika was a mast called the e yashtt
often surmounted by a chhatri or umbrella. Around
the mound was a railing, separating the sacred space
from the secular world.

The early stupas at Sanchi and Bharhut were plain
except for the stone railings, which resembled a
bamboo or wooden fence, and the gateways, which
were richly carved and installed at the four cardinal
points. Worshippers entered through the eastern
gateway and walked around the mound in a clockwise
direction keeping the mound on the right, imitating
the sun’s course through the sky. Later, the mound
of the stupas came to be elaborately carved with
niches and sculptures as at Amaravati, and Shah-
ji-ki-Dheri in Peshawar (Pakistan).

97

Fig. 4.9

A votive inscription from Sanchi
Hundreds of similar inscriptions
have also been found at Bharhut
and Amaravati.

> Discuss...

What are the similarities and
differences between the plan
of the Great Stupa, Sanchi
(Fig. 4.10a) and the
photograph (Fig. 4.3)?

> What are the features of
the building that are

Fig. 10b
An elevation of the Great Stupa
An elevation provides a vertical perspective.

Fig. 4.10a
Plan of the Great Stupa at Sanchi
A plan provides a horizontal perspective of a building.

2 8 mm 3 40 se PRET o
ed

4

| |

| |

| clearestin the plan? What |

| are the features that are FH

| bestseeninthe elevation? |
4

$ 18 25 ASEERS

98

Fig. 4.11
The eastern gateway, Sanchi
Notice the vibrant sculpture.

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

8. “DISCOVERING” STUPAS

THE FATE OF AMARAVATI AND SANCHI
Each stupa has a history of its own - as we have
just seen, some of these are histories of how they
were built. But there are histories of discoveries as
well, and let us now turn to some of these. In 1796,
a local raja who wanted to build a temple stumbled
upon the ruins of the stupa at Amaravati. He
decided to use the stone, and thought there might
be some treasure buried in what seemed to be a
hill. Some years later, a British official named Colin
Mackenzie (see also Chapter 7) visited the site.
Although he found several pieces of sculpture and
made detailed drawings of them, these reports were
never published.

In 1854, Walter Elliot, the commissioner
of Guntur (Andhra Pradesh), visited
Amaravati and collected’ several
sculpture panels and took them away
to Madras. (These came to be called the
Elliot marbles after him.) He also
discovered the remains of the western
gateway and came to the conclusion that
the structure at Amaravati was one of
the largest and most magnificent
Buddhist stupas ever built. By the
1850s, some of the slabs from Amaravati
had begun to be taken to different
places: to the Asiatic Society of Bengal
at Calcutta, to the India Office in
Madras and some even to London. It was
not unusual to find these sculptures
adorning the gardens of British
administrators. In fact, any new official
in the area continued to remove
sculptures from the site on the grounds
that earlier officials had done the same.

One of the few men who had a different
point of view was an archaeologist
named H.H. Cole. He wrote: “It seems
to me a suicidal and indefensible policy
to allow the country to be looted of
original works of ancient art.” He
believed that museums should have
plaster-cast facsimiles of sculpture,
whereas the originals should remain

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS 99

where they had been found. Unfortunately, Cole did
not succeed in convincing the authorities about ~ Discuss...
Amaravati, although his plea for in sifu preservation Read Section | again.
was adopted in the case of Sanchi. Give your reasons why
Why did Sanchi survive while Amaravati did not?  Sanchi survived.
Perhaps Amaravati was discovered before scholars
understood the value of the finds and realised how
critical it was to preserve things where they had
been found instead of removing them from the site.
When Sanchi was “discovered” in 1818, three of its
four gateways were still standing, the fourth was
lying on the spot where it had fallen and the mound
was in good condition. Even so, it was suggested
that the gateway be taken to either Paris or London; Fi
, . ig. 4.12
finally a number of factors helped to keep Sanchias 4 section of the gateway
it was, and so it stands, whereas the mahachaitya Do you think the sculptors at
at Amaravati is now just an insignificant little Sanchi wanted to depict a scroll
mound, totally denuded of its former glory. being unfurled?

IM situ means on the spot.

9. SCULPTURE

We have just seen how sculptures were
removed from stupas and transported
all the way to Europe. This happened
partly because those who saw them
considered them to be beautiful and
valuable, and wanted to keep them for
themselves. Let us look at some of these
more closely.

9.1 Stories in stone
You may have seen wandering storytellers
carrying scrolls (charanachitras) of cloth
or paper with pictures on them and
pointing to the pictures as they tell
the story.
Look at Figure 4.13. At first sight
the sculpture seems to depict a rural
scene, with thatched huts and trees.
However, art historians who have
carefully studied the sculpture at
Sanchi identify it as a scene from
the Vessantara Jataka. This is a
story about a generous prince who
gave away everything to a
Brahmana, and went to live in ~~
the forest with his wife and
children. As you can see in this -

100

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Fig. 4.13
A part of the northern gateway

Fig. 4.14 (far right)

Worshipping the Bodhi tree

Notice the tree, the seat, and the
people around it.

Fig. 4.15 (middle right)
Worshipping the stupa

Fig. 4.16 (below)

Setting in motion the wheel of
dharma

tp

case, historians often try to understand the meaning
of sculpture by comparing it with textual evidence.

9.2 Symbols of worship

Art historians had to acquire familiarity with
hagiographies of the Buddha in order to understand
Buddhist sculpture. According to hagiographies, the
Buddha attained enlightenment while meditating
under a tree. Many early sculptors did not show the
Buddha in human form - instead, they showed his
presence through symbols. The empty seat (Fig. 4.14)
was meant to indicate the meditation of the Buddha,
and the stupa (Fig. 4.15) was meant to represent
the mahaparinibbana. Another frequently used
symbol was the wheel (Fig. 4.16). This stood for the
first sermon of the Buddha, delivered at Sarnath.
As is obvious, such sculptures cannot be understood
literally - for instance, the tree does not stand

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS 101

simply for a tree, but Fig. 4.17
symbolises an event The woman at the gate
in the life of the

Buddha. In order to
understand such

symbols, historians

have to familiarise
themselves with the
traditions of those

who produced these works

of art.

7 9.3 Popular traditions
Other sculptures at Sanchi were
perhaps not directly inspired by
} Buddhist ideas. These include
beautiful women swinging from the
edge of the gateway, holding onto a
tree (Fig.4.17). Initially, scholars were
a bit intrigued about this image,
which seemed to have little to do with
renunciation. However, after examining other
literary traditions, they realised that it could be a
representation of what is described in Sanskrit as
a shalabhanjika. According to popular belief, this
was a woman whose touch caused trees to flower
and bear fruit. It is likely that this was regarded
as an auspicious symbol and integrated into the
decoration of the stupa. The shalabhanjika motif
suggests that many people who turned to Buddhism
enriched it with their own pre-Buddhist and even
non-Buddhist beliefs, practices and ideas.
Some of the recurrent motifs in the
sculpture at Sanchi were evidently
derived from these traditions.

There are other images as well. For
instance, some of the finest depictions
of animals are found there. These
animals include elephants, horses,
monkeys and cattle. While the Jatakas
contain several animal stories that are
depicted at Sanchi, it is likely that many
of these animals were carved to create
lively scenes to draw viewers. Also,
animals were often used as symbols of
human attributes. Elephants, for example,
were depicted to signify strength and wisdom.

Fig. 4.18
An elephant at Sanchi

Fig. 4.19
Gajalakshmi

Fig. 4.20

A painting from Ajanta

Note the seated figure and those
serving him.

Fig. 4.21
A serpent at Sanchi

zr eet

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

| Paintings from the past

While stone sculpture survives the ravages of time and is
therefore most easily available to the historian, other visual
means of communication, including paintings, were also
used in the past. Those that have survived best are on
walls of caves, of which those from Ajanta (Maharashtra)
are the most famous.

The paintings at Ajanta depict stories from the Jatakas.
These include depictions of courtly life, processions, men
and women at work, and festivals. The artists used the
technique of shading to give a three-dimensional quality.
Some of the paintings are extremely naturalistic.

Another motif is that of a woman surrounded by
lotuses and elephants (Fig. 4.19), which seem to be
sprinkling water on her as if performing an abhisheka
or consecration. While some historians identify the
figure as Maya, the mother of the Buddha, others
identify her with a popular goddess, Gajalakshmi -
literally, the goddess of good fortune - who is
associated with elephants. It is also possible that

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

devotees who saw these sculptures identified the
figure with both Maya and Gajalakshmi.

Consider, too, the serpent, which is found on
several pillars (Fig. 4.21). This motif seems to be
derived from popular traditions, which were not
always recorded in texts. Interestingly, one of the
earliest modern art historians, James Fergusson,
considered Sanchi to be a centre of tree and
serpent worship. He was not familiar with Buddhist
literature - most of which had not yet been
translated - and arrived at this conclusion by
studying only the images on their own.

10. NEW RELIGIOUS TRADITIONS

10.1 The development of Mahayana
Buddhism

By the first century ce, there is evidence of
changes in Buddhist ideas and practices. Early
Buddhist teachings had given great importance
to self-effort in achieving nibbana. Besides, the
Buddha was regarded as a human being who
attained enlightenment and nibbana through
his own efforts. However, gradually the idea of
a saviour emerged. It was believed that he
was the one who could ensure salvation.
Simultaneously, the concept of the Bodhisatta
also developed. Bodhisattas were perceived as
deeply compassionate beings who accumulated
merit through their efforts but used this not to
attain nibbana and thereby abandon the world,
but to help others. The worship of images of the
Buddha and Bodhisattas became an important
part of this tradition.

This new way of thinking was called Mahayana
— literally, the “great vehicle”. Those who adopted
these beliefs described the older tradition as
Hinayana or the “lesser vehicle”.

Hinayana or Theravada?

Supporters of Mahayana regarded other Buddhists
as followers of Hinayana. However, followers of the
older tradition described themselves as theravacins,
that is, those who followed the path of old, respected
teachers, the theras.

> Discuss...

Bone, terracotta and metal
can also be used for
sculpture. Find out more
about these.

Fig. 4.22
An image of the Buddha from
Mathura, c. first century cE

104

Fig. 4.23

The Varaha or boar avatar of
Vishnu rescuing the earth goddess,
Aihole (Karnataka) c. sixth

century CE

poo ee
| > What does the proportion

of the figures suggest?

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

10.2 The growth of Puranic Hinduism

The notion of a saviour was not unique to Buddhism.
We find similar ideas being developed in different
ways within traditions that we now consider part of
Hinduism. These included Vaishnavism (a form of
Hinduism within which Vishnu was worshipped as
the principal deity) and Shaivism (a tradition within
which Shiva was regarded as the chief god), in which
there was growing emphasis on the worship of a
chosen deity. In such worship the bond between the
devotee and the god was visualised as one of love
and devotion, or bhakti.

In the case of Vaishnavism,
cults developed around the
various avatars or incarnations
of the deity. Ten avatars were
recognised within the tradition.
These were forms that the deity
was believed to have assumed in
order to save the world whenever
it was threatened by disorder and
destruction because of the
dominance of evil forces. It is
likely that different avatars were
popular in different parts of the
country. Recognising each of
these local deities as a form of
Vishnu was one way of creating
a more unified religious tradition.

Some of these forms were
represented in sculptures, as were
other deities. Shiva, for instance,
was symbolised by the linga,
although he was occasionally
represented in human form too.
All such representations depicted
a complex set of ideas about the
deities and their attributes
through symbols such as head-
dresses, ornaments and ayudhas
— weapons or auspicious objects
the deities hold in their hands -—
how they are seated, etc.

To understand the meanings
of these sculptures historians

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

have to be familiar with the stories behind them -

many of which are contained in the Puranas,
compiled by Brahmanas (by about the middle of the
first millennium ce). They contained much that had
been composed and been in circulation for centuries,
including stories about gods and goddesses.
Generally, they were written in simple Sanskrit verse,
and were meant to be read aloud to everybody,
including women and Shudras, who did not have
access to Vedic learning.

Much of what is contained in the Puranas evolved
through interaction amongst people - priests,
merchants, and ordinary men and women who
travelled from place to place sharing ideas and
beliefs. We know for instance that Vasudeva-Krishna
was an important deity in the Mathura region. Over
centuries, his worship spread to other parts of the
country as well.

10.3 Building temples

Around the time that the stupas at sites such as
Sanchi were acquiring their present form, the first
temples to house images of gods and goddesses were
also being built. The early temple was a small square
room, called the garbhagriha, with a single doorway
for the worshipper to enter and offer worship to the
image. Gradually, a tall structure, known as the

Fig. 4.24
An image of Durga, Mahabalipuram
(Tamil Nadu), c. sixth century cE

CTT 7

| > Identify the ways in which
the artists have depicted
movement. Find out more

| about the story depicted in

| this sculpture.

106 THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

Fig. 4.25

A temple in Deogarh shikhara, was built over the central shrine. Temple
(Uttar Pradesh), c. fifth century ce walls were often decorated with sculpture. Later
Co 1 temples became far more elaborate —- with assembly

> Identify the remains of the
| shikhara and the entrance to halls, huge walls and gateways, and arrangements

. for supplying water (see also Chapter 7).
| the garbhagriha. ee { One of the unique features of early temples was
that some of these were hollowed out of huge rocks,
as artificial caves. The tradition of building artificial
caves was an old one. Some of the earliest (Fig. 4.27)

Fig. 4.26

Vishnu reclining on the serpent
Sheshnag, sculpture from Deogarh
(Uttar Pradesh), c. fifth century ce

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

of these were constructed in the third century BcE
on the orders of Asoka for renouncers who belonged
to the Ajivika sect.

This tradition evolved through various stages and
culminated much later - in the eighth century - in
the carving out of an entire temple, that of
Kailashnatha (a name of Shiva).

A copperplate inscription records the amazement
of the chief sculptor after he completed the temple
at Ellora: “Oh how did I make it!”

11. CAN WE “SEE” EVERYTHING?

By now you have had a glimpse of the rich visual
traditions that existed in the past - expressed in
brick and stone architecture, sculpture and
painting. We have seen that much has been
destroyed and lost over the centuries. Nevertheless,
what remains and has been preserved conveys a
sense of the vision of the artists, sculptors, masons
and architects who created these spectacular works.
Yet, do we always automatically understand what
they wanted to convey? Can we ever know what these
images meant to people who saw them and venerated
them about 2,000 years ago?

11.1 Grappling with the unfamiliar

It will be useful to recall that when nineteenth-
century European scholars first saw some of the
sculptures of gods and goddesses, they could not
understand what these were about. Sometimes, they
were horrified by what seemed to them grotesque

Fig. 4.27
Entrance to a cave at Barabar
(Bihar), c. third century BCE

Fig. 4.28

Kailashnatha Temple, Ellora
(Maharashtra). This entire structure
is carved out of a single piece of
rock.

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

figures, with multiple arms and heads or with
a a a _ combinations of human and animal forms.
> Oe al These early scholars tried to make sense of what
appeared to be strange images by comparing
them with sculpture with which they were
familiar, that from ancient Greece. While they
often found early Indian sculpture inferior
to the works of Greek artists, they were very
excited when they discovered images of the
Buddha and Bodhisattas that were evidently
based on Greek models. These were, more
often than not, found in the northwest, in
cities such as Taxila and Peshawar, where
Indo-Greek rulers had _ established
kingdoms in the second century sce. As
these images were closest to the Greek
statues these scholars were familiar
with, they were considered to be the
best examples of early Indian art. In
effect, these scholars adopted a strategy
we all frequently use - devising
yardsticks derived from the familiar to
make sense of the unfamiliar.

11.2 If text and image do not match ...
Consider another problem. We have seen
that art historians often draw upon textual
traditions to understand the meaning of
sculptures. While this is certainly a far
more efficacious strategy than comparing
Indian images with Greek statues, it is not

always easy to use. One of the most

intriguing examples of this is a famous
sculpture along a huge rock surface in

Mahabalipuram (Tamil Nadu).

Clearly, Fig. 4.30 is a vivid depiction of

a story. But which story is it? Art historians
have searched through the Puranas to
identify it and are sharply divided in their
opinions. Some feel that this depicts the
descent of the river Ganga from heaven — the

Fig. 4.29
A Bodhisatta from Gandhara
Note the clothes and the hairstyle.

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

natural cleft through the centre of the rock surface
might represent the river. The story itself is narrated
in the Puranas and the epics. Others feel that it
represents a story from the Mahabharata -— Arjuna
doing penance on the river bank in order to acquire
arms — pointing to the central figure of an ascetic.

Finally, remember that many rituals, religious beliefs
and practices were not recorded in a permanent,
visible form - as monuments, or sculpture, or even
paintings. These included daily practices, as well as
those associated with special occasions. Many
communities and peoples may not have felt the need
for keeping lasting records, even as they may have
had vibrant traditions of religious activities and
philosophical ideas. In fact, the spectacular
instances we have focused on in this chapter are
just the tip of the iceberg.

=e ——_

~ Discuss...

Describe any religious activity
you have seen.

Is it permanently recorded in
any form?

Fig. 4.30
A sculpture in Mahabalipuram

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

TIMELINE 1 >

MAJOR RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENTS

. 1500-1000 BcE

Early Vedic traditions

ie)

. 1000-500 BcE

Later Vedic traditions

Cc.

. Sixth century BCE

Early Upanishads; Jainism, Buddhism

Cc.

. third century BCE

First stupas

Cc.

. second century
BCE onwards

Development of Mahayana Buddhism, Vaishnavism,
Shaivism and goddess cults

=

. third century cE

Earliest temples

\

r

LANDMARKS IN THE DISCOVERY AND PRESERVATION OF EARLY

Nineteenth century

J

TIMELINE 2

MONUMENTS AND SCULPTURE

1814 Founding of the Indian Museum, Calcutta

1834 Publication of Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus,
by Ram Raja; Cunningham explores the stupa at Sarnath

1835-1842 James Fergusson surveys major archaeological sites

1851 Establishment of the Government Museum, Madras

1854 Alexander Cunningham publishes Bhilsa Topes, one of the
earliest works on Sanchi

1878 Rajendra Lala Mitra publishes Buddha Gaya: The Heritage
of Sakya Muni

1880 H.H. Cole appointed Curator of Ancient Monuments

1888 Passing of the Treasure Trove Act, giving the government

the right to acquire all objects of archaeological interest

Twentieth century

1914 John Marshall and Alfred Foucher publish The Monuments
of Sanchi

1923 John Marshall publishes the Conservation Manual

1955 Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru lays the foundation stone

of the National Museum, New Delhi

\ 1989 Sanchi declared a World Heritage Site j

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

iy ANSWER IN 100-150 WORDS

1.

4.

Were the ideas of the Upanishadic thinkers
different from those of the fatalists and
materialists? Give reasons for your answer.

Summarise the central teachings of Jainism.

Discuss the role of the begums of Bhopal in
preserving the stupa at Sanchi.

Read this short inscription and answer:

In the year 33 of the maharaja Huvishka (a
Kushana ruler), in the first month of the hot
season on the eighth day, a Bodhisatta was set
up at Madhuvanaka by the bhikkhuni Dhanavati,
the sister’s daughter of the bhikkhuni
Buddhamita, who knows the Tipitaka, the female
pupil of the bhikkhu Bala, who knows the
Tipitaka, together with her father and mother.

How did Dhanavati date her inscription?

Why do you think she installed an image of the
Bodhisatta?

Who were the relatives she mentioned?
What Buddhist text did she know?

From whom did she learn this text?

Why do you think women and men joined the
sangha?

Fig. 4.31
A sculpture in Sanchi

THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY

WRITE A SHORT ESSAY (ABOUT
500 WORDS) ON THE FOLLOWING:

To what extent does knowledge of Buddhist
literature help in understanding the sculpture
at Sanchi?

Figs. 4.32 and 4.33 are two scenes from Sanchi.
Describe what you see in each of them, focusing
on the architecture, plants and animals, and the
activities. Identify which one shows a rural
scene and which an urban scene, giving reasons
for your answer.

Discuss the development in sculpture and
architecture associated with the rise of
Vaishnavism and Shaivism.

Discuss how and why stupas were built.

EROS a ee a a TS Oa EF

ee

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS

fy MAP WORK
10.

On an outline world map, mark the areas to which
Buddhism spread. Trace the land and sea routes
from the subcontinent to these areas.

ll.

12.

PROJECT (ANY ONE)

Of the religious traditions discussed in this
chapter, is there any that is practised in your
neighbourhood? What are the religious texts
used today, and how are they preserved and
transmitted? Are images used in worship? If so,
are these similar to or different from those
described in this chapter? Describe the buildings
used for religious activities today, comparing
them with early stupas and temples.

Collect at least five pictures of sculpture or
painting, belonging to different periods and
regions, on the religious traditions described in
this chapter. Remove their captions, and show
each one to two people, and ask them to describe
what they see. Compare their descriptions and
prepare a report on your findings.

If you would like to know
more, read:

AL. Basham. 1985.

The Wonder that was India.
Rupa, Calcutta.

N.N. Bhattacharyya. 1996.
Indian Religious Historiography.
Munshiram Manocharlal,

New Delhi.

MLK. Dhavalikar. 2003.
Monumental Legacy of Sanchi.
Oxford University Press,

New Delhi.

Paul Dundas. 1992.
The Jains.
Routledge, London.

Gavin Flood. 2004.
Introduction to Hinduism.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Richard F. Gombrich. 1988.
Theravada Buddhism: A Social
History from Ancient Benares to
Modern Colombo. Routledge
and Kegan Paul, London.

Benjamin Rowland. 1967.
The Art and Architecture of
India: Buddhist /Hindu/Jain.
Penguin Books,
Harmondsworth.

For more information, —

you could visit:
http://dsal.uchicago.edu/
images/aiis/

Credits for Illustrations

Theme 1
Fig.1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.8, 1.11, 1.12, 1.13, 1.14, 1.15,
1.16, 1.20, 1.22, 1.23, 1.26, 1.28, 1.29, Fig 1.30 of exercises:
Archaeological Survey of India and National Museum,
New Delhi
Fig. 1.7, 1.9, 1.10, 1.17, 1.18, 1.19, 1.21, 1.24:
Prof. Gregory L. Possehl
Fig. 1.27:
Centre for Cultural Resources and Training, New Dethi

Theme 2
Fig. 2.1: American Institute of Indian Studies, Gurgaon
Fig. 2.2, 2.6: Archaeological Survey of India
Fig. 2.3, 2.5, 2.10:

Centre for Cultural Resources and Training, New Dethi
Fig. 2.4, 2.7, 2.9, 2.12, 2.13: National Museum, New Delhi
Fig. 2.8: Wikipedia

Theme 3

Fig. 3.1, 3.10: Archaeological Survey of India

Fig. 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9: National Museum,
New Delhi

Theme 4
Fig. 4.1, 4.5, 4.8, 4.9, 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, 4.15, 4.16, 4.17,
4.18, 4.19, 4.21, 4.22, 4.23, 4.24, 4.25, 4.26, 4.27, 4.29,
4.31, fig 4.32 and 33 in exercise:

American Institute of Indian Studies, Gurgaon
Fig. 4.2: Wikipedia
Fig. 4.3, 4.11, 4.28, 4.30:

Centre for Cultural Resources and Training, New Dethi
Fig. 4.4, 4.6, 4.7, 4.20: National Museum, New Delhi

